<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>SECOND ACT</h2>
			<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
			<p style="text-align: center"><i>Drawing-room at Hunstanton</i>, <i>after dinner</i>, <i>lamps lit</i>.  <i>Door</i> L.C.  <i>Door</i> R.C.</p>
			<p>[<i>Ladies seated on sofas</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What a comfort it is to have got rid of the men for a little!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; men persecute us dreadfully, don’t they?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Persecute us?  I wish they did.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The annoying thing is that the wretches can be perfectly happy without us.  That is why I think it is every woman’s duty never to leave them alone for a single moment, except during this short breathing space after dinner; without which I believe we poor women would be absolutely worn to shadows.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter Servants with coffee</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Worn to shadows, dear?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton.  It is such a strain keeping men up to the mark.  They are always trying to escape from us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  It seems to me that it is we who are always trying to escape from them.  Men are so very, very heartless.  They know their power and use it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  [<i>Takes coffee from Servant</i>.]  What stuff and nonsense all this about men is!  The thing to do is to keep men in their proper place.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  But what is their proper place, Lady Caroline?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Looking after their wives, Mrs. Allonby.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Takes coffee from Servant</i>.]  Really?  And if they’re not married?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  If they are not married, they should be looking after a wife.  It’s perfectly scandalous the amount of bachelors who are going about society.  There should be a law passed to compel them all to marry within twelve months.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  [<i>Refuses coffee</i>.]  But if they’re in love with some one who, perhaps, is tied to another?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  In that case, Lady Stutfield, they should be married off in a week to some plain respectable girl, in order to teach them not to meddle with other people’s property.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I don’t think that we should ever be spoken of as other people’s property.  All men are married women’s property.  That is the only true definition of what married women’s property really is.  But we don’t belong to any one.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Oh, I am so very, very glad to hear you say so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But do you really think, dear Caroline, that legislation would improve matters in any way?  I am told that, nowadays, all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I certainly never know one from the other.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Oh, I think one can always know at once whether a man has home claims upon his life or not.  I have noticed a very, very sad expression in the eyes of so many married men.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, all that I have noticed is that they are horribly tedious when they are good husbands, and abominably conceited when they are not.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, I suppose the type of husband has completely changed since my young days, but I’m bound to state that poor dear Hunstanton was the most delightful of creatures, and as good as gold.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, my husband is a sort of promissory note; I’m tired of meeting him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  But you renew him from time to time, don’t you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh no, Lady Caroline.  I have only had one husband as yet.  I suppose you look upon me as quite an amateur.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  With your views on life I wonder you married at all.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  So do I.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear child, I believe you are really very happy in your married life, but that you like to hide your happiness from others.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I assure you I was horribly deceived in Ernest.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Oh, I hope not, dear.  I knew his mother quite well.  She was a Stratton, Caroline, one of Lord Crowland’s daughters.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Victoria Stratton?  I remember her perfectly.  A silly fair-haired woman with no chin.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, Ernest has a chin.  He has a very strong chin, a square chin.  Ernest’s chin is far too square.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But do you really think a man’s chin can be too square?  I think a man should look very, very strong, and that his chin should be quite, quite square.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Then you should certainly know Ernest, Lady Stutfield.  It is only fair to tell you beforehand he has got no conversation at all.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I adore silent men.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, Ernest isn’t silent.  He talks the whole time.  But he has got no conversation.  What he talks about I don’t know.  I haven’t listened to him for years.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Have you never forgiven him then?  How sad that seems!  But all life is very, very sad, is it not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Life, Lady Stutfield, is simply a <i>mauvais quart d’heure</i> made up of exquisite moments.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, there are moments, certainly.  But was it something very, very wrong that Mr. Allonby did?  Did he become angry with you, and say anything that was unkind or true?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh dear, no.  Ernest is invariably calm.  That is one of the reasons he always gets on my nerves.  Nothing is so aggravating as calmness.  There is something positively brutal about the good temper of most modern men.  I wonder we women stand it as well as we do.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; men’s good temper shows they are not so sensitive as we are, not so finely strung.  It makes a great barrier often between husband and wife, does it not?  But I would so much like to know what was the wrong thing Mr. Allonby did.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Well, I will tell you, if you solemnly promise to tell everybody else.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Thank you, thank you.  I will make a point of repeating it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  When Ernest and I were engaged, he swore to me positively on his knees that he had never loved any one before in the whole course of his life.  I was very young at the time, so I didn’t believe him, I needn’t tell you.  Unfortunately, however, I made no enquiries of any kind till after I had been actually married four or five months.  I found out then that what he had told me was perfectly true.  And that sort of thing makes a man so absolutely uninteresting.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Men always want to be a woman’s first love.  That is their clumsy vanity.  We women have a more subtle instinct about things.  What we like is to be a man’s last romance.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I see what you mean.  It’s very, very beautiful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear child, you don’t mean to tell me that you won’t forgive your husband because he never loved any one else?  Did you ever hear such a thing, Caroline?  I am quite surprised.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Oh, women have become so highly educated, Jane, that nothing should surprise us nowadays, except happy marriages.  They apparently are getting remarkably rare.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, they’re quite out of date.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Except amongst the middle classes, I have been told.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  How like the middle classes!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes—is it not?—very, very like them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  If what you tell us about the middle classes is true, Lady Stutfield, it redounds greatly to their credit.  It is much to be regretted that in our rank of life the wife should be so persistently frivolous, under the impression apparently that it is the proper thing to be.  It is to that I attribute the unhappiness of so many marriages we all know of in society.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Do you know, Lady Caroline, I don’t think the frivolity of the wife has ever anything to do with it. More marriages are ruined nowadays by the common sense of the husband than by anything else.  How can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating her as if she were a perfectly rational being?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Man, poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man belongs to a sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years.  He can’t help himself.  It is in his race.  The History of Woman is very different.  We have always been picturesque protests against the mere existence of common sense.  We saw its dangers from the first.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, the common sense of husbands is certainly most, most trying.  Do tell me your conception of the Ideal Husband.  I think it would be so very, very helpful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The Ideal Husband?  There couldn’t be such a thing.  The institution is wrong.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  The Ideal Man, then, in his relations to <i>us</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  He would probably be extremely realistic.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The Ideal Man!  Oh, the Ideal Man should talk to us as if we were goddesses, and treat us as if we were children.  He should refuse all our serious requests, and gratify every one of our whims.  He should encourage us to have caprices, and forbid us to have missions.  He should always say much more than he means, and always mean much more than he says.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But how could he do both, dear?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He should never run down other pretty women.  That would show he had no taste, or make one suspect that he had too much.  No; he should be nice about them all, but say that somehow they don’t attract him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, that is always very, very pleasant to hear about other women.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  If we ask him a question about anything, he should give us an answer all about ourselves.  He should invariably praise us for whatever qualities he knows we haven’t got.  But he should be pitiless, quite pitiless, in reproaching us for the virtues that we have never dreamed of possessing.  He should never believe that we know the use of useful things.  That would be unforgiveable.  But he should shower on us everything we don’t want.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  As far as I can see, he is to do nothing but pay bills and compliments.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He should persistently compromise us in public, and treat us with absolute respect when we are alone.  And yet he should be always ready to have a perfectly terrible scene, whenever we want one, and to become miserable, absolutely miserable, at a moment’s notice, and to overwhelm us with just reproaches in less than twenty minutes, and to be positively violent at the end of half an hour, and to leave us for ever at a quarter to eight, when we have to go and dress for dinner.  And when, after that, one has seen him for really the last time, and he has refused to take back the little things he has given one, and promised never to communicate with one again, or to write one any foolish letters, he should be perfectly broken-hearted, and telegraph to one all day long, and send one little notes every half-hour by a private hansom, and dine quite alone at the club, so that every one should know how unhappy he was.  And after a whole dreadful week, during which one has gone about everywhere with one’s husband, just to show how absolutely lonely one was, he may be given a third last parting, in the evening, and then, if his conduct has been quite irreproachable, and one has behaved really badly to him, he should be allowed to admit that he has been entirely in the wrong, and when he has admitted that, it becomes a woman’s duty to forgive, and one can do it all over again from the beginning, with variations.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  How clever you are, my dear!  You never mean a single word you say.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Thank you, thank you.  It has been quite, quite entrancing.  I must try and remember it all.  There are such a number of details that are so very, very important.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  But you have not told us yet what the reward of the Ideal Man is to be.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  His reward?  Oh, infinite expectation.  That is quite enough for him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But men are so terribly, terribly exacting, are they not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  That makes no matter.  One should never surrender.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Not even to the Ideal Man?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Certainly not to him.  Unless, of course, one wants to grow tired of him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Oh! . . . yes.  I see that.  It is very, very helpful.  Do you think, Mrs. Allonby, I shall ever meet the Ideal Man?  Or are there more than one?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  There are just four in London, Lady Stutfield.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Oh, my dear!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Going over to her</i>.]  What has happened?  Do tell me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> [<i>in a low voice</i>]  I had completely forgotten that the American young lady has been in the room all the time.  I am afraid some of this clever talk may have shocked her a little.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, that will do her so much good!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Let us hope she didn’t understand much.  I think I had better go over and talk to her.  [<i>Rises and goes across to</i> <span class="smcap">Hester Worsley</span>.]  Well, dear Miss Worsley. [<i>Sitting down beside her</i>.]  How quiet you have been in your nice little corner all this time!  I suppose you have been reading a book?  There are so many books here in the library.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  No, I have been listening to the conversation.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You mustn’t believe everything that was said, you know, dear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I didn’t believe any of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  That is quite right, dear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Continuing</i>.]  I couldn’t believe that any women could really hold such views of life as I have heard to-night from some of your guests.  [<i>An awkward pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I hear you have such pleasant society in America.  Quite like our own in places, my son wrote to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  There are cliques in America as elsewhere, Lady Hunstanton.  But true American society consists simply of all the good women and good men we have in our country.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What a sensible system, and I dare say quite pleasant too.  I am afraid in England we have too many artificial social barriers.  We don’t see as much as we should of the middle and lower classes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  In America we have no lower classes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Really?  What a very strange arrangement!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What is that dreadful girl talking about?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  She is painfully natural, is she not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  There are a great many things you haven’t got in America, I am told, Miss Worsley.  They say you have no ruins, and no curiosities.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]  What nonsense!  They have their mothers and their manners.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  The English aristocracy supply us with our curiosities, Lady Caroline.  They are sent over to us every summer, regularly, in the steamers, and propose to us the day after they land.  As for ruins, we are trying to build up something that will last longer than brick or stone.  [<i>Gets up to take her fan from table</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What is that, dear?  Ah, yes, an iron Exhibition, is it not, at that place that has the curious name?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Standing by table</i>.]  We are trying to build up life, Lady Hunstanton, on a better, truer, purer basis than life rests on here.  This sounds strange to you all, no doubt.  How could it sound other than strange?  You rich people in England, you don’t know how you are living.  How could you know?  You shut out from your society the gentle and the good.  You laugh at the simple and the pure.  Living, as you all do, on others and by them, you sneer at self-sacrifice, and if you throw bread to the poor, it is merely to keep them quiet for a season.  With all your pomp and wealth and art you don’t know how to live—you don’t even know that.  You love the beauty that you can see and touch and handle, the beauty that you can destroy, and do destroy, but of the unseen beauty of life, of the unseen beauty of a higher life, you know nothing.  You have lost life’s secret.  Oh, your English society seems to me shallow, selfish, foolish.  It has blinded its eyes, and stopped its ears.  It lies like a leper in purple.  It sits like a dead thing smeared with gold.  It is all wrong, all wrong.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I don’t think one should know of these things.  It is not very, very nice, is it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Miss Worsley, I thought you liked English society so much.  You were such a success in it.  And you were so much admired by the best people.  I quite forget what Lord Henry Weston said of you—but it was most complimentary, and you know what an authority he is on beauty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Lord Henry Weston!  I remember him, Lady Hunstanton.  A man with a hideous smile and a hideous past.  He is asked everywhere.  No dinner-party is complete without him.  What of those whose ruin is due to him?  They are outcasts.  They are nameless.  If you met them in the street you would turn your head away.  I don’t complain of their punishment.  Let all women who have sinned be punished.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>enters from terrace behind in a cloak with a lace veil over her head</i>.  <i>She hears the last words and starts</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear young lady!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  It is right that they should be punished, but don’t let them be the only ones to suffer.  If a man and woman have sinned, let them both go forth into the desert to love or loathe each other there.  Let them both be branded.  Set a mark, if you wish, on each, but don’t punish the one and let the other go free.  Don’t have one law for men and another for women.  You are unjust to women in England.  And till you count what is a shame in a woman to be an infamy in a man, you will always be unjust, and Right, that pillar of fire, and Wrong, that pillar of cloud, will be made dim to your eyes, or be not seen at all, or if seen, not regarded.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Might I, dear Miss Worsley, as you are standing up, ask you for my cotton that is just behind you?  Thank you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Mrs. Arbuthnot!  I am so pleased you have come up.  But I didn’t hear you announced.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, I came straight in from the terrace, Lady Hunstanton, just as I was.  You didn’t tell me you had a party.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Not a party.  Only a few guests who are staying in the house, and whom you must know.  Allow me.  [<i>Tries to help her</i>.  <i>Rings bell</i>.]  Caroline, this is Mrs. Arbuthnot, one of my sweetest friends.  Lady Caroline Pontefract, Lady Stutfield, Mrs. Allonby, and my young American friend, Miss Worsley, who has just been telling us all how wicked we are.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I am afraid you think I spoke too strongly, Lady Hunstanton.  But there are some things in England—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear young lady, there was a great deal of truth, I dare say, in what you said, and you looked very pretty while you said it, which is much more important, Lord Illingworth would tell us.  The only point where I thought you were a little hard was about Lady Caroline’s brother, about poor Lord Henry.  He is really such good company.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter Footman</i>.]</p>
			<p>Take Mrs. Arbuthnot’s things.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit Footman with wraps</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Lady Caroline, I had no idea it was your brother.  I am sorry for the pain I must have caused you—I—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  My dear Miss Worsley, the only part of your little speech, if I may so term it, with which I thoroughly agreed, was the part about my brother.  Nothing that you could possibly say could be too bad for him.  I regard Henry as infamous, absolutely infamous.  But I am bound to state, as you were remarking, Jane, that he is excellent company, and he has one of the best cooks in London, and after a good dinner one can forgive anybody, even one’s own relations.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> [<i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Miss Worsley</span>]  Now, do come, dear, and make friends with Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She is one of the good, sweet, simple people you told us we never admitted into society.  I am sorry to say Mrs. Arbuthnot comes very rarely to me.  But that is not my fault.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What a bore it is the men staying so long after dinner!  I expect they are saying the most dreadful things about us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Do you really think so?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I was sure of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  How very, very horrid of them!  Shall we go onto the terrace?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, anything to get away from the dowagers and the dowdies.  [<i>Rises and goes with</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> <i>to door</i> L.C.]  We are only going to look at the stars, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You will find a great many, dear, a great many.  But don’t catch cold.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  We shall all miss Gerald so much, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But has Lord Illingworth really offered to make Gerald his secretary?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Oh, yes!  He has been most charming about it.  He has the highest possible opinion of your boy.  You don’t know Lord Illingworth, I believe, dear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have never met him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You know him by name, no doubt?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I am afraid I don’t.  I live so much out of the world, and see so few people.  I remember hearing years ago of an old Lord Illingworth who lived in Yorkshire, I think.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, yes.  That would be the last Earl but one.  He was a very curious man.  He wanted to marry beneath him.  Or wouldn’t, I believe.  There was some scandal about it.  The present Lord Illingworth is quite different.  He is very distinguished.  He does—well, he does nothing, which I am afraid our pretty American visitor here thinks very wrong of anybody, and I don’t know that he cares much for the subjects in which you are so interested, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  Do you think, Caroline, that Lord Illingworth is interested in the Housing of the Poor?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I should fancy not at all, Jane.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  We all have our different tastes, have we not?  But Lord Illingworth has a very high position, and there is nothing he couldn’t get if he chose to ask for it.  Of course, he is comparatively a young man still, and he has only come to his title within—how long exactly is it, Caroline, since Lord Illingworth succeeded?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  About four years, I think, Jane.  I know it was the same year in which my brother had his last exposure in the evening newspapers.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, I remember.  That would be about four years ago.  Of course, there were a great many people between the present Lord Illingworth and the title, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  There was—who was there, Caroline?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  There was poor Margaret’s baby.  You remember how anxious she was to have a boy, and it was a boy, but it died, and her husband died shortly afterwards, and she married almost immediately one of Lord Ascot’s sons, who, I am told, beats her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, that is in the family, dear, that is in the family.  And there was also, I remember, a clergyman who wanted to be a lunatic, or a lunatic who wanted to be a clergyman, I forget which, but I know the Court of Chancery investigated the matter, and decided that he was quite sane.  And I saw him afterwards at poor Lord Plumstead’s with straws in his hair, or something very odd about him.  I can’t recall what.  I often regret, Lady Caroline, that dear Lady Cecilia never lived to see her son get the title.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lady Cecilia?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Lord Illingworth’s mother, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, was one of the Duchess of Jerningham’s pretty daughters, and she married Sir Thomas Harford, who wasn’t considered a very good match for her at the time, though he was said to be the handsomest man in London.  I knew them all quite intimately, and both the sons, Arthur and George.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It was the eldest son who succeeded, of course, Lady Hunstanton?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  No, dear, he was killed in the hunting field.  Or was it fishing, Caroline?  I forget.  But George came in for everything.  I always tell him that no younger son has ever had such good luck as he has had.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lady Hunstanton, I want to speak to Gerald at once.  Might I see him?  Can he be sent for?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Certainly, dear.  I will send one of the servants into the dining-room to fetch him.  I don’t know what keeps the gentlemen so long.  [<i>Rings bell</i>.]  When I knew Lord Illingworth first as plain George Harford, he was simply a very brilliant young man about town, with not a penny of money except what poor dear Lady Cecilia gave him.  She was quite devoted to him.  Chiefly, I fancy, because he was on bad terms with his father.  Oh, here is the dear Archdeacon.  [<i>To Servant</i>.]  It doesn’t matter.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Doctor Daubeny</span>.  <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>goes over to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>, <span class="smcap">Doctor Daubeny</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Lord Illingworth has been most entertaining.  I have never enjoyed myself more.  [<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Ah, Mrs. Arbuthnot.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Doctor Baubeny</span>.]  You see I have got Mrs. Arbuthnot to come to me at last.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  That is a great honour, Lady Hunstanton.  Mrs. Daubeny will be quite jealous of you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, I am so sorry Mrs. Daubeny could not come with you to-night.  Headache as usual, I suppose.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton; a perfect martyr.  But she is happiest alone.  She is happiest alone.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  [<i>To her husband</i>.]  John!  [<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>goes over to his wife</i>.  <span class="smcap">Doctor Baubeny</span> <i>talks to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> watches <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> the whole time.  He has passed across the room without noticing her, and approaches <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>, who with <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> is standing by the door looking on to the terrace.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How is the most charming woman in the world?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [Taking <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> by the hand.]  We are both quite well, thank you, Lord Illingworth.  But what a short time you have been in the dining-room!  It seems as if we had only just left.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was bored to death.  Never opened my lips the whole time.  Absolutely longing to come in to you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You should have.  The American girl has been giving us a lecture.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Really?  All Americans lecture, I believe.  I suppose it is something in their climate.  What did she lecture about?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, Puritanism, of course.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I am going to convert her, am I not?  How long do you give me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  A week.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  A week is more than enough.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Going to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Dear mother!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald, I don’t feel at all well.  See me home, Gerald.  I shouldn’t have come.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I am so sorry, mother.  Certainly.  But you must know Lord Illingworth first.  [<i>Goes across room</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Not to-night, Gerald.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lord Illingworth, I want you so much to know my mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  With the greatest pleasure.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]  I’ll be back in a moment.  People’s mothers always bore me to death.  All women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  No man does.  That is his.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What a delightful mood you are in to-night!  [<i>Turns round and goes across with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  <i>When he sees her</i>, <i>he starts back in wonder</i>.  <i>Then slowly his eyes turn towards</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, this is Lord Illingworth, who has offered to take me as his private secretary.  [<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>bows coldly</i>.]  It is a wonderful opening for me, isn’t it?  I hope he won’t be disappointed in me, that is all.  You’ll thank Lord Illingworth, mother, won’t you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lord Illingworth in very good, I am sure, to interest himself in you for the moment.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Putting his hand on</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald’s</span> <i>shoulder</i>.]  Oh, Gerald and I are great friends already, Mrs . . . Arbuthnot.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  There can be nothing in common between you and my son, Lord Illingworth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Dear mother, how can you say so?  Of course Lord Illingworth is awfully clever and that sort of thing.  There is nothing Lord Illingworth doesn’t know.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear boy!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  He knows more about life than any one I have ever met.  I feel an awful duffer when I am with you, Lord Illingworth.  Of course, I have had so few advantages.  I have not been to Eton or Oxford like other chaps.  But Lord Illingworth doesn’t seem to mind that.  He has been awfully good to me, mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lord Illingworth may change his mind.  He may not really want you as his secretary.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You must remember, as you said yourself, you have had so few advantages.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Lord Illingworth, I want to speak to you for a moment.  Do come over.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Will you excuse me, Mrs. Arbuthnot?  Now, don’t let your charming mother make any more difficulties, Gerald.  The thing is quite settled, isn’t it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I hope so.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>goes across to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I thought you were never going to leave the lady in black velvet.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  She is excessively handsome.  [<i>Looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Caroline, shall we all make a move to the music-room?  Miss Worsley is going to play.  You’ll come too, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, won’t you?  You don’t know what a treat is in store for you.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Doctor Baubeny</span>.]  I must really take Miss Worsley down some afternoon to the rectory.  I should so much like dear Mrs. Daubeny to hear her on the violin.  Ah, I forgot.  Dear Mrs. Daubeny’s hearing is a little defective, is it not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Her deafness is a great privation to her.  She can’t even hear my sermons now.  She reads them at home.  But she has many resources in herself, many resources.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  She reads a good deal, I suppose?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Just the very largest print.  The eyesight is rapidly going.  But she’s never morbid, never morbid.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]  Do speak to my mother, Lord Illingworth, before you go into the music-room.  She seems to think, somehow, you don’t mean what you said to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Aren’t you coming?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  In a few moments.  Lady Hunstanton, if Mrs. Arbuthnot would allow me, I would like to say a few words to her, and we will join you later on.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, of course.  You will have a great deal to say to her, and she will have a great deal to thank you for.  It is not every son who gets such an offer, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  But I know you appreciate that, dear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Now, don’t keep Mrs. Arbuthnot too long, Lord Illingworth.  We can’t spare her.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit following the other guests</i>.  <i>Sound of violin heard from music-room</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So that is our son, Rachel!  Well, I am very proud of him.  He in a Harford, every inch of him.  By the way, why Arbuthnot, Rachel?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  One name is as good as another, when one has no right to any name.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I suppose so—but why Gerald?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  After a man whose heart I broke—after my father.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Well, Rachel, what is over is over.  All I have got to say now in that I am very, very much pleased with our boy.  The world will know him merely as my private secretary, but to me he will be something very near, and very dear.  It is a curious thing, Rachel; my life seemed to be quite complete.  It was not so.  It lacked something, it lacked a son.  I have found my son now, I am glad I have found him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You have no right to claim him, or the smallest part of him.  The boy is entirely mine, and shall remain mine.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Rachel, you have had him to yourself for over twenty years.  Why not let me have him for a little now?  He is quite as much mine as yours.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Are you talking of the child you abandoned?  Of the child who, as far as you are concerned, might have died of hunger and of want?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You forget, Rachel, it was you who left me.  It was not I who left you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I left you because you refused to give the child a name.  Before my son was born, I implored you to marry me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I had no expectations then.  And besides, Rachel, I wasn’t much older than you were.  I was only twenty-two.  I was twenty-one, I believe, when the whole thing began in your father’s garden.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  When a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old enough to do right also.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Rachel, intellectual generalities are always interesting, but generalities in morals mean absolutely nothing.  As for saying I left our child to starve, that, of course, is untrue and silly.  My mother offered you six hundred a year.  But you wouldn’t take anything.  You simply disappeared, and carried the child away with you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I wouldn’t have accepted a penny from her.  Your father was different.  He told you, in my presence, when we were in Paris, that it was your duty to marry me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh, duty is what one expects from others, it is not what one does oneself.  Of course, I was influenced by my mother.  Every man is when he is young.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I am glad to hear you say so.  Gerald shall certainly not go away with you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What nonsense, Rachel!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Do you think I would allow my son—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  <i>Our</i> son.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  My son [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>shrugs his shoulders</i>]—to go away with the man who spoiled my youth, who ruined my life, who has tainted every moment of my days?  You don’t realise what my past has been in suffering and in shame.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Rachel, I must candidly say that I think Gerald’s future considerably more important than your past.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald cannot separate his future from my past.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  That is exactly what he should do.  That is exactly what you should help him to do.  What a typical woman you are!  You talk sentimentally, and you are thoroughly selfish the whole time.  But don’t let us have a scene.  Rachel, I want you to look at this matter from the common-sense point of view, from the point of view of what is best for our son, leaving you and me out of the question.  What is our son at present?  An underpaid clerk in a small Provincial Bank in a third-rate English town.  If you imagine he is quite happy in such a position, you are mistaken.  He is thoroughly discontented.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He was not discontented till he met you.  You have made him so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Of course, I made him so.  Discontent is the first step in the progress of a man or a nation.  But I did not leave him with a mere longing for things he could not get.  No, I made him a charming offer.  He jumped at it, I need hardly say.  Any young man would.  And now, simply because it turns out that I am the boy’s own father and he my own son, you propose practically to ruin his career.  That is to say, if I were a perfect stranger, you would allow Gerald to go away with me, but as he is my own flesh and blood you won’t.  How utterly illogical you are!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not allow him to go.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How can you prevent it?  What excuse can you give to him for making him decline such an offer as mine?  I won’t tell him in what relations I stand to him, I need hardly say.  But you daren’t tell him.  You know that.  Look how you have brought him up.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have brought him up to be a good man.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Quite so.  And what is the result?  You have educated him to be your judge if he ever finds you out.  And a bitter, an unjust judge he will be to you.  Don’t be deceived, Rachel.  Children begin by loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely, if ever, do they forgive them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  George, don’t take my son away from me.  I have had twenty years of sorrow, and I have only had one thing to love me, only one thing to love.  You have had a life of joy, and pleasure, and success.  You have been quite happy, you have never thought of us.  There was no reason, according to your views of life, why you should have remembered us at all.  Your meeting us was a mere accident, a horrible accident.  Forget it.  Don’t come now, and rob me of . . . of all I have in the whole world.  You are so rich in other things.  Leave me the little vineyard of my life; leave me the walled-in garden and the well of water; the ewe-lamb God sent me, in pity or in wrath, oh! leave me that.  George, don’t take Gerald from me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Rachel, at the present moment you are not necessary to Gerald’s career; I am.  There is nothing more to be said on the subject.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not let him go.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Here is Gerald.  He has a right to decide for himself.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Well, dear mother, I hope you have settled it all with Lord Illingworth?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have not, Gerald.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Your mother seems not to like your coming with me, for some reason.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Why, mother?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I thought you were quite happy here with me, Gerald.  I didn’t know you were so anxious to leave me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, how can you talk like that?  Of course I have been quite happy with you.  But a man can’t stay always with his mother.  No chap does.  I want to make myself a position, to do something.  I thought you would have been proud to see me Lord Illingworth’s secretary.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I do not think you would be suitable as a private secretary to Lord Illingworth.  You have no qualifications.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I don’t wish to seem to interfere for a moment, Mrs. Arbuthnot, but as far as your last objection is concerned, I surely am the best judge.  And I can only tell you that your son has all the qualifications I had hoped for.  He has more, in fact, than I had even thought of.  Far more.  [<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>remains silent</i>.]  Have you any other reason, Mrs. Arbuthnot, why you don’t wish your son to accept this post?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Have you, mother?  Do answer.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  If you have, Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray, pray say it.  We are quite by ourselves here.  Whatever it is, I need not say I will not repeat it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  If you would like to be alone with your son, I will leave you.  You may have some other reason you don’t wish me to hear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have no other reason.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Then, my dear boy, we may look on the thing as settled.  Come, you and I will smoke a cigarette on the terrace together.  And Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray let me tell you, that I think you have acted very, very wisely.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>is left alone</i>.  <i>She stands immobile with a look of unutterable sorrow on her face</i>.]</p>
			<p style="text-align: center">
				<span class="smcap">Act Drop</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
