<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>FIRST ACT</h2>
			<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
			<p style="text-align: center"><i>Lawn in front of the terrace at Hunstanton</i>.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline Pontefract</span>, <span class="smcap">Miss Worsley</span>, <i>on chairs under large yew tree</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I believe this is the first English country house you have stayed at, Miss Worsley?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Yes, Lady Caroline.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You have no country houses, I am told, in America?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  We have not many.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Have you any country?  What we should call country?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Smiling</i>.]  We have the largest country in the world, Lady Caroline.  They used to tell us at school that some of our states are as big as France and England put together.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Ah! you must find it very draughty, I should fancy.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.]  John, you should have your muffler.  What is the use of my always knitting mufflers for you if you won’t wear them?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  I am quite warm, Caroline, I assure you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think not, John.  Well, you couldn’t come to a more charming place than this, Miss Worsley, though the house is excessively damp, quite unpardonably damp, and dear Lady Hunstanton is sometimes a little lax about the people she asks down here.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.]  Jane mixes too much.  Lord Illingworth, of course, is a man of high distinction.  It is a privilege to meet him.  And that member of Parliament, Mr. Kettle—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  He must be quite respectable.  One has never heard his name before in the whole course of one’s life, which speaks volumes for a man, nowadays.  But Mrs. Allonby is hardly a very suitable person.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I dislike Mrs. Allonby.  I dislike her more than I can say.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I am not sure, Miss Worsley, that foreigners like yourself should cultivate likes or dislikes about the people they are invited to meet.  Mrs. Allonby is very well born.  She is a niece of Lord Brancaster’s.  It is said, of course, that she ran away twice before she was married.  But you know how unfair people often are.  I myself don’t believe she ran away more than once.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Mr. Arbuthnot is very charming.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Ah, yes! the young man who has a post in a bank.  Lady Hunstanton is most kind in asking him here, and Lord Illingworth seems to have taken quite a fancy to him.  I am not sure, however, that Jane is right in taking him out of his position.  In my young days, Miss Worsley, one never met any one in society who worked for their living.  It was not considered the thing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  In America those are the people we respect most.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I have no doubt of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Mr. Arbuthnot has a beautiful nature!  He is so simple, so sincere.  He has one of the most beautiful natures I have ever come across.  It is a privilege to meet <i>him</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  It is not customary in England, Miss Worsley, for a young lady to speak with such enthusiasm of any person of the opposite sex.  English women conceal their feelings till after they are married.  They show them then.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Do you, in England, allow no friendship to exist between a young man and a young girl?</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>, <i>followed by Footman with shawls and a cushion</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  We think it very inadvisable.  Jane, I was just saying what a pleasant party you have asked us to meet.  You have a wonderful power of selection.  It is quite a gift.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Dear Caroline, how kind of you!  I think we all do fit in very nicely together.  And I hope our charming American visitor will carry back pleasant recollections of our English country life.  [<i>To Footman</i>.]  The cushion, there, Francis.  And my shawl.  The Shetland.  Get the Shetland.  [<i>Exit Footman for shawl</i>.]</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lady Hunstanton, I have such good news to tell you.  Lord Illingworth has just offered to make me his secretary.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  His secretary?  That is good news indeed, Gerald.  It means a very brilliant future in store for you.  Your dear mother will be delighted.  I really must try and induce her to come up here to-night.  Do you think she would, Gerald?  I know how difficult it is to get her to go anywhere.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Oh!  I am sure she would, Lady Hunstanton, if she knew Lord Illingworth had made me such an offer.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter Footman with shawl</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I will write and tell her about it, and ask her to come up and meet him.  [<i>To Footman</i>.]  Just wait, Francis.  [<i>Writes letter</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  That is a very wonderful opening for so young a man as you are, Mr. Arbuthnot.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  It is indeed, Lady Caroline.  I trust I shall be able to show myself worthy of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I trust so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]  <i>You</i> have not congratulated me yet, Miss Worsley.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Are you very pleased about it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Of course I am.  It means everything to me—things that were out of the reach of hope before may be within hope’s reach now.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Nothing should be out of the reach of hope.  Life is a hope.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I fancy, Caroline, that Diplomacy is what Lord Illingworth is aiming at.  I heard that he was offered Vienna.  But that may not be true.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I don’t think that England should be represented abroad by an unmarried man, Jane.  It might lead to complications.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You are too nervous, Caroline.  Believe me, you are too nervous.  Besides, Lord Illingworth may marry any day.  I was in hopes he would have married lady Kelso.  But I believe he said her family was too large.  Or was it her feet?  I forget which.  I regret it very much.  She was made to be an ambassador’s wife.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  She certainly has a wonderful faculty of remembering people’s names, and forgetting their faces.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, that is very natural, Caroline, is it not?  [<i>To Footman</i>.]  Tell Henry to wait for an answer.  I have written a line to your dear mother, Gerald, to tell her your good news, and to say she really must come to dinner.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit Footman</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  That is awfully kind of you, Lady Hunstanton.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]  Will you come for a stroll, Miss Worsley?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  With pleasure.  [<i>Exit with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I am very much gratified at Gerald Arbuthnot’s good fortune.  He is quite a <i>protégé</i> of mine.  And I am particularly pleased that Lord Illingworth should have made the offer of his own accord without my suggesting anything.  Nobody likes to be asked favours.  I remember poor Charlotte Pagden making herself quite unpopular one season, because she had a French governess she wanted to recommend to every one.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I saw the governess, Jane.  Lady Pagden sent her to me.  It was before Eleanor came out.  She was far too good-looking to be in any respectable household.  I don’t wonder Lady Pagden was so anxious to get rid of her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, that explains it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John, the grass is too damp for you.  You had better go and put on your overshoes at once.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline, I assure you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You must allow me to be the best judge of that, John.  Pray do as I tell you.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>gets up and goes off</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You spoil him, Caroline, you do indeed!</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
			<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]  Well, dear, I hope you like the park.  It is said to be well timbered.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The trees are wonderful, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Quite, quite wonderful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  But somehow, I feel sure that if I lived in the country for six months, I should become so unsophisticated that no one would take the slightest notice of me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I assure you, dear, that the country has not that effect at all.  Why, it was from Melthorpe, which is only two miles from here, that Lady Belton eloped with Lord Fethersdale.  I remember the occurrence perfectly.  Poor Lord Belton died three days afterwards of joy, or gout.  I forget which.  We had a large party staying here at the time, so we were all very much interested in the whole affair.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I think to elope is cowardly.  It’s running away from danger.  And danger has become so rare in modern life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  As far as I can make out, the young women of the present day seem to make it the sole object of their lives to be always playing with fire.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The one advantage of playing with fire, Lady Caroline, is that one never gets even singed.  It is the people who don’t know how to play with it who get burned up.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; I see that.  It is very, very helpful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I don’t know how the world would get on with such a theory as that, dear Mrs. Allonby.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Ah!  The world was made for men and not for women.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Stutfield.  We have a much better time than they have.  There are far more things forbidden to us than are forbidden to them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; that is quite, quite true.  I had not thought of that.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mr. Kelvil</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, Mr. Kelvil, have you got through your work?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I have finished my writing for the day, Lady Hunstanton.  It has been an arduous task.  The demands on the time of a public man are very heavy nowadays, very heavy indeed.  And I don’t think they meet with adequate recognition.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John, have you got your overshoes on?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Yes, my love.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think you had better come over here, John.  It is more sheltered.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think not, John.  You had better sit beside me.  [<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>rises and goes across</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  And what have you been writing about this morning, Mr. Kelvil?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  On the usual subject, Lady Stutfield.  On Purity.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  That must be such a very, very interesting thing to write about.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  It is the one subject of really national importance, nowadays, Lady Stutfield.  I purpose addressing my constituents on the question before Parliament meets.  I find that the poorer classes of this country display a marked desire for a higher ethical standard.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  How quite, quite nice of them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Are you in favour of women taking part in politics, Mr. Kettle?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  The growing influence of women is the one reassuring thing in our political life, Lady Caroline.  Women are always on the side of morality, public and private.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  It is so very, very gratifying to hear you say that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, yes!—the moral qualities in women—that is the important thing.  I am afraid, Caroline, that dear Lord Illingworth doesn’t value the moral qualities in women as much as he should.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  The world says that Lord Illingworth is very, very wicked.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  But what world says that, Lady Stutfield?  It must be the next world.  This world and I are on excellent terms.  [<i>Sits down beside</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Every one <i>I</i> know says you are very, very wicked.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is perfectly monstrous the way people go about, nowadays, saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely and entirely true.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Dear Lord Illingworth is quite hopeless, Lady Stutfield.  I have given up trying to reform him.  It would take a Public Company with a Board of Directors and a paid Secretary to do that.  But you have the secretary already, Lord Illingworth, haven’t you?  Gerald Arbuthnot has told us of his good fortune; it is really most kind of you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Hunstanton.  Kind is a dreadful word.  I took a great fancy to young Arbuthnot the moment I met him, and he’ll be of considerable use to me in something I am foolish enough to think of doing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  He is an admirable young man.  And his mother is one of my dearest friends.  He has just gone for a walk with our pretty American.  She is very pretty, is she not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Far too pretty.  These American girls carry off all the good matches.  Why can’t they stay in their own country?  They are always telling us it is the Paradise of women.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is, Lady Caroline.  That is why, like Eve, they are so extremely anxious to get out of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Who are Miss Worsley’s parents?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  American women are wonderfully clever in concealing their parents.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Lord Illingworth, what do you mean?  Miss Worsley, Caroline, is an orphan.  Her father was a very wealthy millionaire or philanthropist, or both, I believe, who entertained my son quite hospitably, when he visited Boston.  I don’t know how he made his money, originally.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I fancy in American dry goods.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What are American dry goods?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  American novels.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  How very singular! . . . Well, from whatever source her large fortune came, I have a great esteem for Miss Worsley.  She dresses exceedingly well.  All Americans do dress well.  They get their clothes in Paris.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  They say, Lady Hunstanton, that when good Americans die they go to Paris.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Indeed?  And when bad Americans die, where do they go to?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh, they go to America.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I am afraid you don’t appreciate America, Lord Illingworth.  It is a very remarkable country, especially considering its youth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The youth of America is their oldest tradition.  It has been going on now for three hundred years.  To hear them talk one would imagine they were in their first childhood.  As far as civilisation goes they are in their second.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  There is undoubtedly a great deal of corruption in American politics.  I suppose you allude to that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I wonder.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Politics are in a sad way everywhere, I am told.  They certainly are in England.  Dear Mr. Cardew is ruining the country.  I wonder Mrs. Cardew allows him.  I am sure, Lord Illingworth, you don’t think that uneducated people should be allowed to have votes?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I think they are the only people who should.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Do you take no side then in modern politics, Lord Illingworth?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should never take sides in anything, Mr. Kelvil.  Taking sides is the beginning of sincerity, and earnestness follows shortly afterwards, and the human being becomes a bore.  However, the House of Commons really does very little harm.  You can’t make people good by Act of Parliament,—that is something.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  You cannot deny that the House of Commons has always shown great sympathy with the sufferings of the poor.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  That is its special vice.  That is the special vice of the age.  One should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of life.  The less said about life’s sores the better, Mr. Kelvil.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Still our East End is a very important problem.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Quite so.  It is the problem of slavery.  And we are trying to solve it by amusing the slaves.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Certainly, a great deal may be done by means of cheap entertainments, as you say, Lord Illingworth.  Dear Dr. Daubeny, our rector here, provides, with the assistance of his curates, really admirable recreations for the poor during the winter.  And much good may be done by means of a magic lantern, or a missionary, or some popular amusement of that kind.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I am not at all in favour of amusements for the poor, Jane.  Blankets and coals are sufficient.  There is too much love of pleasure amongst the upper classes as it is.  Health is what we want in modern life.  The tone is not healthy, not healthy at all.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  You are quite right, Lady Caroline.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I believe I am usually right.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Horrid word ‘health.’</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Silliest word in our language, and one knows so well the popular idea of health.  The English country gentleman galloping after a fox—the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  May I ask, Lord Illingworth, if you regard the House of Lords as a better institution than the House of Commons?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  A much better institution, of course.  We in the House of Lords are never in touch with public opinion.  That makes us a civilised body.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Are you serious in putting forward such a view?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Quite serious, Mr. Kelvil.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]  Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has given them an idea, whether one is serious or not.  Nothing is serious except passion.  The intellect is not a serious thing, and never has been.  It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all.  The only serious form of intellect I know is the British intellect.  And on the British intellect the illiterates play the drum.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What are you saying, Lord Illingworth, about the drum?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was merely talking to Mrs. Allonby about the leading articles in the London newspapers.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But do you believe all that is written in the newspapers?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I do.  Nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.  [<i>Rises with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Are you going, Mrs. Allonby?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Just as far as the conservatory.  Lord Illingworth told me this morning that there was an orchid there as beautiful as the seven deadly sins.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear, I hope there is nothing of the kind.  I will certainly speak to the gardener.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Remarkable type, Mrs. Allonby.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  She lets her clever tongue run away with her sometimes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Is that the only thing, Jane, Mrs. Allonby allows to run away with her?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I hope so, Caroline, I am sure.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
			<p>Dear Lord Alfred, do join us.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span> <i>sits down beside</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You believe good of every one, Jane.  It is a great fault.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Do you really, really think, Lady Caroline, that one should believe evil of every one?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think it is much safer to do so, Lady Stutfield.  Until, of course, people are found out to be good.  But that requires a great deal of investigation nowadays.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But there is so much unkind scandal in modern life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Lord Illingworth remarked to me last night at dinner that the basis of every scandal is an absolutely immoral certainty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Lord Illingworth is, of course, a very brilliant man, but he seems to me to be lacking in that fine faith in the nobility and purity of life which is so important in this century.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, quite, quite important, is it not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  He gives me the impression of a man who does not appreciate the beauty of our English home-life.  I would say that he was tainted with foreign ideas on the subject.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  There is nothing, nothing like the beauty of home-life, is there?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  It is the mainstay of our moral system in England, Lady Stutfield.  Without it we would become like our neighbours.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  That would be so, so sad, would it not?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I am afraid, too, that Lord Illingworth regards woman simply as a toy.  Now, I have never regarded woman as a toy.  Woman is the intellectual helpmeet of man in public as in private life.  Without her we should forget the true ideals.  [<i>Sits down beside</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I am so very, very glad to hear you say that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You a married man, Mr. Kettle?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, dear, Kelvil.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I am married, Lady Caroline.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Family?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  How many?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Eight.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> <i>turns her attention to</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Mrs. Kettle and the children are, I suppose, at the seaside?  [<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>shrugs his shoulders</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  My wife is at the seaside with the children, Lady Caroline.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You will join them later on, no doubt?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  If my public engagements permit me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Your public life must be a great source of gratification to Mrs. Kettle.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]  How very, very charming those gold-tipped cigarettes of yours are, Lord Alfred.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  They are awfully expensive.  I can only afford them when I’m in debt.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  It must be terribly, terribly distressing to be in debt.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  One must have some occupation nowadays.  If I hadn’t my debts I shouldn’t have anything to think about.  All the chaps I know are in debt.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But don’t the people to whom you owe the money give you a great, great deal of annoyance?</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter Footman</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  Oh, no, they write; I don’t.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  How very, very strange.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, here is a letter, Caroline, from dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She won’t dine.  I am so sorry.  But she will come in the evening.  I am very pleased indeed.  She is one of the sweetest of women.  Writes a beautiful hand, too, so large, so firm.  [<i>Hands letter to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  [<i>Looking at it</i>.]  A little lacking in femininity, Jane.  Femininity is the quality I admire most in women.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Taking back letter and leaving it on table</i>.]  Oh! she is very feminine, Caroline, and so good too.  You should hear what the Archdeacon says of her.  He regards her as his right hand in the parish.  [<i>Footman speaks to her</i>.]  In the Yellow Drawing-room.  Shall we all go in?  Lady Stutfield, shall we go in to tea?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  With pleasure, Lady Hunstanton.  [<i>They rise and proceed to go off</i>.  <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> offers to carry <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield’s</span> cloak.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John!  If you would allow your nephew to look after Lady Stutfield’s cloak, you might help me with my workbasket.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Certainly, my love.  [<i>Exeunt</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Curious thing, plain women are always jealous of their husbands, beautiful women never are!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Beautiful women never have time.  They are always so occupied in being jealous of other people’s husbands.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I should have thought Lady Caroline would have grown tired of conjugal anxiety by this time!  Sir John is her fourth!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So much marriage is certainly not becoming.  Twenty years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years of marriage make her something like a public building.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Twenty years of romance!  Is there such a thing?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Not in our day.  Women have become too brilliant.  Nothing spoils a romance so much as a sense of humour in the woman.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Or the want of it in the man.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You are quite right.  In a Temple every one should be serious, except the thing that is worshipped.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  And that should be man?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Women kneel so gracefully; men don’t.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You are thinking of Lady Stutfield!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I assure you I have not thought of Lady Stutfield for the last quarter of an hour.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Is she such a mystery?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  She is more than a mystery—she is a mood.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Moods don’t last.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is their chief charm.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lord Illingworth, every one has been congratulating me, Lady Hunstanton and Lady Caroline, and . . . every one.  I hope I shall make a good secretary.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You will be the pattern secretary, Gerald.  [<i>Talks to him</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You enjoy country life, Miss Worsley?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Very much indeed.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Don’t find yourself longing for a London dinner-party?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I dislike London dinner-parties.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I adore them.  The clever people never listen, and the stupid people never talk.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I think the stupid people talk a great deal.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, I never listen!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear boy, if I didn’t like you I wouldn’t have made you the offer.  It is because I like you so much that I want to have you with me.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
			<p>Charming fellow, Gerald Arbuthnot!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He is very nice; very nice indeed.  But I can’t stand the American young lady.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  She told me yesterday, and in quite a loud voice too, that she was only eighteen.  It was most annoying.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should never trust a woman who tells one her real age.  A woman who would tell one that, would tell one anything.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  She is a Puritan besides—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Ah, that is inexcusable.  I don’t mind plain women being Puritans.  It is the only excuse they have for being plain.  But she is decidedly pretty.  I admire her immensely.  [<i>Looks steadfastly at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What a thoroughly bad man you must be!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What do you call a bad man?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The sort of man who admires innocence.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And a bad woman?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh! the sort of woman a man never gets tired of.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You are severe—on yourself.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Define us as a sex.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Sphinxes without secrets.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Does that include the Puritan women?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Do you know, I don’t believe in the existence of Puritan women?  I don’t think there is a woman in the world who would not be a little flattered if one made love to her.  It is that which makes women so irresistibly adorable.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You think there is no woman in the world who would object to being kissed?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Very few.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Miss Worsley would not let you kiss her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Are you sure?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Quite.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What do you think she’d do if I kissed her?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Either marry you, or strike you across the face with her glove.  What would you do if she struck you across the face with her glove?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Fall in love with her, probably.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Then it is lucky you are not going to kiss her!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Is that a challenge?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It is an arrow shot into the air.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Don’t you know that I always succeed in whatever I try?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I am sorry to hear it.  We women adore failures.  They lean on us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You worship successes.  You cling to them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  We are the laurels to hide their baldness.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And they need you always, except at the moment of triumph.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  They are uninteresting then.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How tantalising you are!  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Lord Illingworth, there is one thing I shall always like you for.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Only one thing?  And I have so many bad qualities.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, don’t be too conceited about them.  You may lose them as you grow old.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I never intend to grow old.  The soul is born old but grows young.  That is the comedy of life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  And the body is born young and grows old.  That is life’s tragedy.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Its comedy also, sometimes.  But what is the mysterious reason why you will always like me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It is that you have never made love to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I have never done anything else.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Really?  I have not noticed it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How fortunate!  It might have been a tragedy for both of us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  We should each have survived.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One can survive everything nowadays, except death, and live down anything except a good reputation.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Have you tried a good reputation?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is one of the many annoyances to which I have never been subjected.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It may come.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Why do you threaten me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I will tell you when you have kissed the Puritan.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter Footman</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Francis</span>.  Tea is served in the Yellow Drawing-room, my lord.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Tell her ladyship we are coming in.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Francis</span>.  Yes, my lord.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Shall we go in to tea?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Do you like such simple pleasures?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I adore simple pleasures.  They are the last refuge of the complex.  But, if you wish, let us stay here.  Yes, let us stay here.  The Book of Life begins with a man and a woman in a garden.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It ends with Revelations.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You fence divinely.  But the button has come off your foil.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I have still the mask.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It makes your eyes lovelier.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Thank you.  Come.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot’s</span> <i>letter on table</i>, <i>and takes it up and looks at envelope</i>.]  What a curious handwriting!  It reminds me of the handwriting of a woman I used to know years ago.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Who?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A woman of no importance.  [<i>Throws letter down</i>, <i>and passes up the steps of the terrace with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  <i>They smile at each other</i>.]</p>
			<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Act Drop</span>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
