<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>FOURTH ACT</h2>
			<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
			<p><i>Sitting-room at Mrs. Arbuthnot’s</i>.  <i>Large open French window at back</i>, <i>looking on to garden</i>.  <i>Doors</i> R.C. <i>and</i> L.C.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Gerald Arbuthnot</span> <i>writing at table</i>.]</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span> R.C. <i>followed by</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>.  Lady Hunstanton and Mrs. Allonby.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit</i> L.C.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Good morning, Gerald.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  Good morning, Lady Hunstanton.  Good morning, Mrs. Allonby.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Sitting down</i>.]  We came to inquire for your dear mother, Gerald.  I hope she is better?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  My mother has not come down yet, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, I am afraid the heat was too much for her last night.  I think there must have been thunder in the air.  Or perhaps it was the music.  Music makes one feel so romantic—at least it always gets on one’s nerves.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It’s the same thing, nowadays.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I am so glad I don’t know what you mean, dear.  I am afraid you mean something wrong.  Ah, I see you’re examining Mrs. Arbuthnot’s pretty room.  Isn’t it nice and old-fashioned?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Surveying the room through her lorgnette</i>.]  It looks quite the happy English home.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  That’s just the word, dear; that just describes it.  One feels your mother’s good influence in everything she has about her, Gerald.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Lord Illingworth says that all influence is bad, but that a good influence is the worst in the world.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  When Lord Illingworth knows Mrs. Arbuthnot better he will change his mind.  I must certainly bring him here.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I should like to see Lord Illingworth in a happy English home.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  It would do him a great deal of good, dear.  Most women in London, nowadays, seem to furnish their rooms with nothing but orchids, foreigners, and French novels.  But here we have the room of a sweet saint.  Fresh natural flowers, books that don’t shock one, pictures that one can look at without blushing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  But I like blushing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, there <i>is</i> a good deal to be said for blushing, if one can do it at the proper moment.  Poor dear Hunstanton used to tell me I didn’t blush nearly often enough.  But then he was so very particular.  He wouldn’t let me know any of his men friends, except those who were over seventy, like poor Lord Ashton: who afterwards, by the way, was brought into the Divorce Court.  A most unfortunate case.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I delight in men over seventy.  They always offer one the devotion of a lifetime.  I think seventy an ideal age for a man.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  She is quite incorrigible, Gerald, isn’t she?  By-the-by, Gerald, I hope your dear mother will come and see me more often now.  You and Lord Illingworth start almost immediately, don’t you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I have given up my intention of being Lord Illingworth’s secretary.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Surely not, Gerald!  It would be most unwise of you.  What reason can you have?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t think I should be suitable for the post.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I wish Lord Illingworth would ask me to be his secretary.  But he says I am not serious enough.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear, you really mustn’t talk like that in this house.  Mrs. Arbuthnot doesn’t know anything about the wicked society in which we all live.  She won’t go into it.  She is far too good.  I consider it was a great honour her coming to me last night.  It gave quite an atmosphere of respectability to the party.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, that must have been what you thought was thunder in the air.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear, how can you say that?  There is no resemblance between the two things at all.  But really, Gerald, what do you mean by not being suitable?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lord Illingworth’s views of life and mine are too different.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But, my dear Gerald, at your age you shouldn’t have any views of life.  They are quite out of place.  You must be guided by others in this matter.  Lord Illingworth has made you the most flattering offer, and travelling with him you would see the world—as much of it, at least, as one should look at—under the best auspices possible, and stay with all the right people, which is so important at this solemn moment in your career.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t want to see the world: I’ve seen enough of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I hope you don’t think you have exhausted life, Mr. Arbuthnot.  When a man says that, one knows that life has exhausted him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t wish to leave my mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Now, Gerald, that is pure laziness on your part.  Not leave your mother!  If I were your mother I would insist on your going.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span> L.C.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>.  Mrs. Arbuthnot’s compliments, my lady, but she has a bad headache, and cannot see any one this morning.  [<i>Exit</i> R.C.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  A bad headache!  I am so sorry!  Perhaps you’ll bring her up to Hunstanton this afternoon, if she is better, Gerald.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I am afraid not this afternoon, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, to-morrow, then.  Ah, if you had a father, Gerald, he wouldn’t let you waste your life here.  He would send you off with Lord Illingworth at once.  But mothers are so weak.  They give up to their sons in everything.  We are all heart, all heart.  Come, dear, I must call at the rectory and inquire for Mrs. Daubeny, who, I am afraid, is far from well.  It is wonderful how the Archdeacon bears up, quite wonderful.  He is the most sympathetic of husbands.  Quite a model.  Good-bye, Gerald, give my fondest love to your mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Good-bye, Mr. Arbuthnot.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Good-bye.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>sits down and reads over his letter</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  What name can I sign?  I, who have no right to any name.  [<i>Signs name</i>, <i>puts letter into envelope</i>, <i>addresses it</i>, <i>and is about to seal it</i>, <i>when door</i> L.C. <i>opens and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>enters</i>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>lays down sealing-wax</i>.  <i>Mother and son look at each other</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Through French window at the back</i>.]  Good-bye again, Gerald.  We are taking the short cut across your pretty garden.  Now, remember my advice to you—start at once with Lord Illingworth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  <i>Au revoir</i>, Mr. Arbuthnot.  Mind you bring me back something nice from your travels—not an Indian shawl—on no account an Indian shawl.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exeunt</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I have just written to him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  To whom?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  To my father.  I have written to tell him to come here at four o’clock this afternoon.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He shall not come here.  He shall not cross the threshold of my house.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  He must come.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald, if you are going away with Lord Illingworth, go at once.  Go before it kills me: but don’t ask me to meet him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you don’t understand.  Nothing in the world would induce me to go away with Lord Illingworth, or to leave you.  Surely you know me well enough for that.  No: I have written to him to say—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What can you have to say to him?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Can’t you guess, mother, what I have written in this letter?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, surely you can.  Think, think what must be done, now, at once, within the next few days.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  There is nothing to be done.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I have written to Lord Illingworth to tell him that he must marry you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Marry me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I will force him to do it.  The wrong that has been done you must be repaired.  Atonement must be made.  Justice may be slow, mother, but it comes in the end.  In a few days you shall be Lord Illingworth’s lawful wife.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But, Gerald—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I will insist upon his doing it.  I will make him do it: he will not dare to refuse.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But, Gerald, it is I who refuse.  I will not marry Lord Illingworth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Not marry him?  Mother!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not marry him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But you don’t understand: it is for your sake I am talking, not for mine.  This marriage, this necessary marriage, this marriage which for obvious reasons must inevitably take place, will not help me, will not give me a name that will be really, rightly mine to bear.  But surely it will be something for you, that you, my mother, should, however late, become the wife of the man who is my father.  Will not that be something?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not marry him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you must.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not.  You talk of atonement for a wrong done.  What atonement can be made to me?  There is no atonement possible.  I am disgraced: he is not.  That is all.  It is the usual history of a man and a woman as it usually happens, as it always happens.  And the ending is the ordinary ending.  The woman suffers.  The man goes free.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t know if that is the ordinary ending, mother: I hope it is not.  But your life, at any rate, shall not end like that.  The man shall make whatever reparation is possible.  It is not enough.  It does not wipe out the past, I know that.  But at least it makes the future better, better for you, mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I refuse to marry Lord Illingworth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  If he came to you himself and asked you to be his wife you would give him a different answer.  Remember, he is my father.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  If he came himself, which he will not do, my answer would be the same.  Remember I am your mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you make it terribly difficult for me by talking like that; and I can’t understand why you won’t look at this matter from the right, from the only proper standpoint.  It is to take away the bitterness out of your life, to take away the shadow that lies on your name, that this marriage must take place.  There is no alternative: and after the marriage you and I can go away together.  But the marriage must take place first.  It is a duty that you owe, not merely to yourself, but to all other women—yes: to all the other women in the world, lest he betray more.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I owe nothing to other women.  There is not one of them to help me.  There is not one woman in the world to whom I could go for pity, if I would take it, or for sympathy, if I could win it.  Women are hard on each other.  That girl, last night, good though she is, fled from the room as though I were a tainted thing.  She was right.  I am a tainted thing.  But my wrongs are my own, and I will bear them alone.  I must bear them alone.  What have women who have not sinned to do with me, or I with them?  We do not understand each other.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>behind</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I implore you to do what I ask you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What son has ever asked of his mother to make so hideous a sacrifice?  None.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  What mother has ever refused to marry the father of her own child?  None.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Let me be the first, then.  I will not do it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you believe in religion, and you brought me up to believe in it also.  Well, surely your religion, the religion that you taught me when I was a boy, mother, must tell you that I am right.  You know it, you feel it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I do not know it.  I do not feel it, nor will I ever stand before God’s altar and ask God’s blessing on so hideous a mockery as a marriage between me and George Harford.  I will not say the words the Church bids us to say.  I will not say them.  I dare not.  How could I swear to love the man I loathe, to honour him who wrought you dishonour, to obey him who, in his mastery, made me to sin?  No: marriage is a sacrament for those who love each other.  It is not for such as him, or such as me.  Gerald, to save you from the world’s sneers and taunts I have lied to the world.  For twenty years I have lied to the world.  I could not tell the world the truth.  Who can, ever?  But not for my own sake will I lie to God, and in God’s presence.  No, Gerald, no ceremony, Church-hallowed or State-made, shall ever bind me to George Harford.  It may be that I am too bound to him already, who, robbing me, yet left me richer, so that in the mire of my life I found the pearl of price, or what I thought would be so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t understand you now.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Men don’t understand what mothers are.  I am no different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong I did, and my very heavy punishments and great disgrace.  And yet, to bear you I had to look on death.  To nurture you I had to wrestle with it.  Death fought with me for you.  All women have to fight with death to keep their children.  Death, being childless, wants our children from us.  Gerald, when you were naked I clothed you, when you were hungry I gave you food.  Night and day all that long winter I tended you.  No office is too mean, no care too lowly for the thing we women love—and oh! how <i>I</i> loved <i>you</i>.  Not Hannah, Samuel more.  And you needed love, for you were weakly, and only love could have kept you alive.  Only love can keep any one alive.  And boys are careless often and without thinking give pain, and we always fancy that when they come to man’s estate and know us better they will repay us.  But it is not so.  The world draws them from our side, and they make friends with whom they are happier than they are with us, and have amusements from which we are barred, and interests that are not ours: and they are unjust to us often, for when they find life bitter they blame us for it, and when they find it sweet we do not taste its sweetness with them . . . You made many friends and went into their houses and were glad with them, and I, knowing my secret, did not dare to follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun and sat in darkness.  What should I have done in honest households?  My past was ever with me. . . . And you thought I didn’t care for the pleasant things of life.  I tell you I longed for them, but did not dare to touch them, feeling I had no right.  You thought I was happier working amongst the poor.  That was my mission, you imagined.  It was not, but where else was I to go?  The sick do not ask if the hand that smooths their pillow is pure, nor the dying care if the lips that touch their brow have known the kiss of sin.  It was you I thought of all the time; I gave to them the love you did not need: lavished on them a love that was not theirs . . . And you thought I spent too much of my time in going to Church, and in Church duties.  But where else could I turn?  God’s house is the only house where sinners are made welcome, and you were always in my heart, Gerald, too much in my heart.  For, though day after day, at morn or evensong, I have knelt in God’s house, I have never repented of my sin.  How could I repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit!  Even now that you are bitter to me I cannot repent.  I do not.  You are more to me than innocence.  I would rather be your mother—oh! much rather!—than have been always pure . . . Oh, don’t you see? don’t you understand?  It is my dishonour that has made you so dear to me.  It is my disgrace that has bound you so closely to me.  It is the price I paid for you—the price of soul and body—that makes me love you as I do.  Oh, don’t ask me to do this horrible thing.  Child of my shame, be still the child of my shame!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I didn’t know you loved me so much as that.  And I will be a better son to you than I have been.  And you and I must never leave each other . . . but, mother . . . I can’t help it . . . you must become my father’s wife.  You must marry him.  It is your duty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Running forwards and embracing</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  No, no; you shall not.  That would be real dishonour, the first you have ever known.  That would be real disgrace: the first to touch you.  Leave him and come with me.  There are other countries than England . . . Oh! other countries over sea, better, wiser, and less unjust lands.  The world is very wide and very big.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No, not for me.  For me the world is shrivelled to a palm’s breadth, and where I walk there are thorns.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  It shall not be so.  We shall somewhere find green valleys and fresh waters, and if we weep, well, we shall weep together.  Have we not both loved him?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Hester!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Waving him back</i>.]  Don’t, don’t!  You cannot love me at all, unless you love her also.  You cannot honour me, unless she’s holier to you.  In her all womanhood is martyred.  Not she alone, but all of us are stricken in her house.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Hester, Hester, what shall I do?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Do you respect the man who is your father?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Respect him?  I despise him!  He is infamous.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I thank you for saving me from him last night.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Ah, that is nothing.  I would die to save you.  But you don’t tell me what to do now!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Have I not thanked you for saving <i>me</i>?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But what should I do?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Ask your own heart, not mine.  I never had a mother to save, or shame.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He is hard—he is hard.  Let me go away.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Rushes over and kneels down bedside his mother</i>.]  Mother, forgive me: I have been to blame.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Don’t kiss my hands: they are cold.  My heart is cold: something has broken it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Ah, don’t say that.  Hearts live by being wounded.  Pleasure may turn a heart to stone, riches may make it callous, but sorrow—oh, sorrow cannot break it.  Besides, what sorrows have you now?  Why, at this moment you are more dear to him than ever, <i>dear</i> though you have <i>been</i>, and oh! how dear you <i>have</i> been always.  Ah! be kind to him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  You are my mother and my father all in one.  I need no second parent.  It was for you I spoke, for you alone.  Oh, say something, mother.  Have I but found one love to lose another?  Don’t tell me that.  O mother, you are cruel.  [<i>Gets up and flings himself sobbing on a sofa</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]  But has he found indeed another love?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  You know I have loved him always.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But we are very poor.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Who, being loved, is poor?  Oh, no one.  I hate my riches.  They are a burden.  Let him share it with me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But we are disgraced.  We rank among the outcasts. Gerald is nameless.  The sins of the parents should be visited on the children.  It is God’s law.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I was wrong.  God’s law is only Love.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Rises</i>, <i>and taking</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>by the hand</i>, <i>goes slowly over to where</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>is lying on the sofa with his head buried in his hands</i>.  <i>She touches him and he looks up</i>.]  Gerald, I cannot give you a father, but I have brought you a wife.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I am not worthy either of her or you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  So she comes first, you are worthy.  And when you are away, Gerald . . . with . . . her—oh, think of me sometimes.  Don’t forget me.  And when you pray, pray for me.  We should pray when we are happiest, and you will be happy, Gerald.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Oh, you don’t think of leaving us?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you won’t leave us?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I might bring shame upon you!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  For a little then: and if you let me, near you always.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Come out with us to the garden.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Later on, later on.  [<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>goes towards door</i> L.C.   <i>Stops at looking-glass over mantelpiece and looks into it</i>.  <i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span> R.C.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>.  A gentleman to see you, ma’am.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Say I am not at home.  Show me the card.  [<i>Takes card from salver and looks at it</i>.]  Say I will not see him.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>enters</i>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>sees him in the glass and starts</i>, <i>but does not turn round</i>.  <i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span>.]  What can you have to say to me to-day, George Harford?  You can have nothing to say to me.  You must leave this house.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Rachel, Gerald knows everything about you and me now, so some arrangement must be come to that will suit us all three.  I assure you, he will find in me the most charming and generous of fathers.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  My son may come in at any moment.  I saved you last night.  I may not be able to save you again.  My son feels my dishonour strongly, terribly strongly.  I beg you to go.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Sitting down</i>.]  Last night was excessively unfortunate.  That silly Puritan girl making a scene merely because I wanted to kiss her.  What harm is there in a kiss?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Turning round</i>.]  A kiss may ruin a human life, George Harford.  <i>I</i> know that.  <i>I</i> know that too well.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  We won’t discuss that at present.  What is of importance to-day, as yesterday, is still our son.  I am extremely fond of him, as you know, and odd though it may seem to you, I admired his conduct last night immensely.  He took up the cudgels for that pretty prude with wonderful promptitude.  He is just what I should have liked a son of mine to be.  Except that no son of mine should ever take the side of the Puritans: that is always an error.  Now, what I propose is this.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lord Illingworth, no proposition of yours interests me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  According to our ridiculous English laws, I can’t legitimise Gerald.  But I can leave him my property.  Illingworth is entailed, of course, but it is a tedious barrack of a place.  He can have Ashby, which is much prettier, Harborough, which has the best shooting in the north of England, and the house in St. James Square.  What more can a gentleman require in this world?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Nothing more, I am quite sure.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  As for a title, a title is really rather a nuisance in these democratic days.  As George Harford I had everything I wanted.  Now I have merely everything that other people want, which isn’t nearly so pleasant.  Well, my proposal is this.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I told you I was not interested, and I beg you to go.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The boy is to be with you for six months in the year, and with me for the other six.  That is perfectly fair, is it not?  You can have whatever allowance you like, and live where you choose.  As for your past, no one knows anything about it except myself and Gerald.  There is the Puritan, of course, the Puritan in white muslin, but she doesn’t count.  She couldn’t tell the story without explaining that she objected to being kissed, could she?  And all the women would think her a fool and the men think her a bore.  And you need not be afraid that Gerald won’t be my heir.  I needn’t tell you I have not the slightest intention of marrying.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You come too late.  My son has no need of you.  You are not necessary.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What do you mean, Rachel?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  That you are not necessary to Gerald’s career.  He does not require you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I do not understand you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Look into the garden.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>rises and goes towards window</i>.]  You had better not let them see you: you bring unpleasant memories.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>looks out and starts</i>.]  She loves him.  They love each other.  We are safe from you, and we are going away.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Where?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  We will not tell you, and if you find us we will not know you.  You seem surprised.  What welcome would you get from the girl whose lips you tried to soil, from the boy whose life you have shamed, from the mother whose dishonour comes from you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You have grown hard, Rachel.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I was too weak once.  It is well for me that I have changed.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was very young at the time.  We men know life too early.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  And we women know life too late.  That is the difference between men and women.  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Rachel, I want my son.  My money may be of no use to him now.  I may be of no use to him, but I want my son.  Bring us together, Rachel.  You can do it if you choose.  [<i>Sees letter on table</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  There is no room in my boy’s life for you.  He is not interested in <i>you</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Then why does he write to me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What do you mean?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What letter is this?  [<i>Takes up letter</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  That—is nothing.  Give it to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is addressed to <i>me</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You are not to open it.  I forbid you to open it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And in Gerald’s handwriting.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It was not to have been sent.  It is a letter he wrote to you this morning, before he saw me.  But he is sorry now he wrote it, very sorry.  You are not to open it.  Give it to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It belongs to me.  [<i>Opens it</i>, <i>sits down and reads it slowly</i>. <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>watches him all the time</i>.]  You have read this letter, I suppose, Rachel?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You know what is in it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I don’t admit for a moment that the boy is right in what he says.  I don’t admit that it is any duty of mine to marry you.  I deny it entirely.  But to get my son back I am ready—yes, I am ready to marry you, Rachel—and to treat you always with the deference and respect due to my wife.  I will marry you as soon as you choose.  I give you my word of honour.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You made that promise to me once before and broke it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I will keep it now.  And that will show you that I love my son, at least as much as you love him.  For when I marry you, Rachel, there are some ambitions I shall have to surrender.  High ambitions, too, if any ambition is high.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I decline to marry you, Lord Illingworth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Are you serious?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Do tell me your reasons.  They would interest me enormously.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have already explained them to my son.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I suppose they were intensely sentimental, weren’t they?  You women live by your emotions and for them.  You have no philosophy of life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You are right.  We women live by our emotions and for them.  By our passions, and for them, if you will.  I have two passions, Lord Illingworth: my love of him, my hate of you.  You cannot kill those.  They feed each other.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What sort of love is that which needs to have hate as its brother?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It is the sort of love I have for Gerald.  Do you think that terrible?  Well it is terrible.  All love is terrible.  All love is a tragedy.  I loved you once, Lord Illingworth.  Oh, what a tragedy for a woman to have loved you!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So you really refuse to marry me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Because you hate me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And does my son hate me as you do?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I am glad of that, Rachel.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He merely despises you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What a pity!  What a pity for him, I mean.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Don’t be deceived, George.  Children begin by loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely if ever do they forgive them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Reads letter over again</i>, <i>very slowly</i>.]  May I ask by what arguments you made the boy who wrote this letter, this beautiful, passionate letter, believe that you should not marry his father, the father of your own child?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It was not I who made him see it.  It was another.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What <i>fin-de-siècle</i> person?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  The Puritan, Lord Illingworth.  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Winces</i>, <i>then rises slowly and goes over to table where his hat and gloves are</i>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>is standing close to the table</i>.  <i>He picks up one of the gloves, and begins pulling it on</i>.]  There is not much then for me to do here, Rachel?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Nothing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is good-bye, is it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  For ever, I hope, this time, Lord Illingworth.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How curious!  At this moment you look exactly as you looked the night you left me twenty years ago.  You have just the same expression in your mouth.  Upon my word, Rachel, no woman ever loved me as you did.  Why, you gave yourself to me like a flower, to do anything I liked with.  You were the prettiest of playthings, the most fascinating of small romances . . . [<i>Pulls out watch</i>.]  Quarter to two!  Must be strolling back to Hunstanton.  Don’t suppose I shall see you there again.  I’m sorry, I am, really.  It’s been an amusing experience to have met amongst people of one’s own rank, and treated quite seriously too, one’s mistress, and one’s—</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>snatches up glove and strikes</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>across the face with it</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>starts</i>.  <i>He is dazed by the insult of his punishment</i>.  <i>Then he controls himself</i>, <i>and goes to window and looks out at his son</i>.  <i>Sighs and leaves the room</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Falls sobbing on the sofa</i>.]  He would have said it.  He would have said it.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>from the garden</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Well, dear mother.  You never came out after all.  So we have come in to fetch you.  Mother, you have not been crying?  [<i>Kneels down beside her</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  My boy!  My boy!  My boy!  [<i>Running her fingers through his hair</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Coming over</i>.]  But you have two children now.  You’ll let me be your daughter?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Looking up</i>.]  Would you choose me for a mother?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  You of all women I have ever known.</p>
			<p>[<i>They move towards the door leading into garden with their arms round each other’s waists</i>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>goes to table</i> L.C. <i>for his hat</i>.  <i>On turning round he sees</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth’s</span> <i>glove lying on the floor</i>, <i>and picks it up</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Hallo, mother, whose glove is this?  You have had a visitor.  Who was it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Turning round</i>.]  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A man of no importance.</p>
			<p style="text-align: center">
				<span class="smcap">Curtain</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
