<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html lang="en">
	<body>
		<p style="text-align: center">TO<br/> GLADYS<br/> COUNTESS DE GREY</p>
		<p style="text-align: center">
			<span class="GutSmall">[MARCHIONESS OF RIPON]</span>
		</p>
		<div class="gapspace"> </div>
		<h2>THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY</h2>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Sir John Pontefract</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Lord Alfred Rufford</span>
		</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mr. Kelvil</span>, M.P.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Ven. Archdeacon Daubeny</span>, D.D.</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Gerald Arbuthnot</span>
		</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Farquhar</span>, Butler</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Francis</span>, Footman</p>
		<div class="gapspace"> </div>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Lady Caroline Pontefract</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Miss Hester Worsley</span>
		</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>, Maid</p>
		<p>
			<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>
		</p>
		<h2>THE SCENES OF THE PLAY</h2>
		<p><span class="smcap">Act</span> I.  <i>The Terrace at Hunstanton Chase</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Act</span> II.  <i>The Drawing-room at Hunstanton Chase</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Act</span> III.  <i>The Hall at Hunstanton Chase</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Act</span> IV.  <i>Sitting-room in Mrs. Arbuthnot’s House at Wrockley</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Time</span>:  <i>The Present</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Place</span>:  <i>The Shires</i>.</p>
		<p style="text-align: center"><i>The action of the play takes place within twenty-four hours</i>.</p>
		<h2>LONDON: HAYMARKET THEATRE</h2>
		<p style="text-align: center"><i>Lessee and Manager</i>: <i>Mr. H Beerbohm Tree</i><br/> <i>April</i> 19<i>th</i>, 1893</p>
		<table>
			<tbody>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Tree</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Sir John Pontefract</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. E. Holman Clark</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Lord Alfred Rufford</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Ernest Lawford</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p><span class="smcap">Mr. Kelvil</span>, M.P.</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Charles Allan</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p><span class="smcap">The Ven. Archdeacon Daubeny</span>, D.D.</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Kemble</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Gerald Arbuthnot</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Terry</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p><span class="smcap">Farquhar</span> (<i>Butler</i>)</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Hay</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p><span class="smcap">Francis</span> (<i>Footman</i>)</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mr. Montague</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Miss Rose Leclercq</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Lady Caroline Pontefract</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Miss Le Thière</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Miss Blanche Horlock</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mrs. Tree</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Miss Hester Worsley</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Miss Julia Neilson</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span> (<i>Maid</i>)</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Miss Kelly</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>
						</p>
					</td>
					<td>
						<p><i>Mrs. Bernard-Beere</i>.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
			</tbody>
		</table>
		<h2>FIRST ACT</h2>
		<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
		<p style="text-align: center"><i>Lawn in front of the terrace at Hunstanton</i>.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline Pontefract</span>, <span class="smcap">Miss Worsley</span>, <i>on chairs under large yew tree</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I believe this is the first English country house you have stayed at, Miss Worsley?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Yes, Lady Caroline.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You have no country houses, I am told, in America?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  We have not many.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Have you any country?  What we should call country?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Smiling</i>.]  We have the largest country in the world, Lady Caroline.  They used to tell us at school that some of our states are as big as France and England put together.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Ah! you must find it very draughty, I should fancy.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.]  John, you should have your muffler.  What is the use of my always knitting mufflers for you if you won’t wear them?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  I am quite warm, Caroline, I assure you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think not, John.  Well, you couldn’t come to a more charming place than this, Miss Worsley, though the house is excessively damp, quite unpardonably damp, and dear Lady Hunstanton is sometimes a little lax about the people she asks down here.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.]  Jane mixes too much.  Lord Illingworth, of course, is a man of high distinction.  It is a privilege to meet him.  And that member of Parliament, Mr. Kettle—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  He must be quite respectable.  One has never heard his name before in the whole course of one’s life, which speaks volumes for a man, nowadays.  But Mrs. Allonby is hardly a very suitable person.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I dislike Mrs. Allonby.  I dislike her more than I can say.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I am not sure, Miss Worsley, that foreigners like yourself should cultivate likes or dislikes about the people they are invited to meet.  Mrs. Allonby is very well born.  She is a niece of Lord Brancaster’s.  It is said, of course, that she ran away twice before she was married.  But you know how unfair people often are.  I myself don’t believe she ran away more than once.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Mr. Arbuthnot is very charming.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Ah, yes! the young man who has a post in a bank.  Lady Hunstanton is most kind in asking him here, and Lord Illingworth seems to have taken quite a fancy to him.  I am not sure, however, that Jane is right in taking him out of his position.  In my young days, Miss Worsley, one never met any one in society who worked for their living.  It was not considered the thing.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  In America those are the people we respect most.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I have no doubt of it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Mr. Arbuthnot has a beautiful nature!  He is so simple, so sincere.  He has one of the most beautiful natures I have ever come across.  It is a privilege to meet <i>him</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  It is not customary in England, Miss Worsley, for a young lady to speak with such enthusiasm of any person of the opposite sex.  English women conceal their feelings till after they are married.  They show them then.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Do you, in England, allow no friendship to exist between a young man and a young girl?</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>, <i>followed by Footman with shawls and a cushion</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  We think it very inadvisable.  Jane, I was just saying what a pleasant party you have asked us to meet.  You have a wonderful power of selection.  It is quite a gift.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Dear Caroline, how kind of you!  I think we all do fit in very nicely together.  And I hope our charming American visitor will carry back pleasant recollections of our English country life.  [<i>To Footman</i>.]  The cushion, there, Francis.  And my shawl.  The Shetland.  Get the Shetland.  [<i>Exit Footman for shawl</i>.]</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lady Hunstanton, I have such good news to tell you.  Lord Illingworth has just offered to make me his secretary.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  His secretary?  That is good news indeed, Gerald.  It means a very brilliant future in store for you.  Your dear mother will be delighted.  I really must try and induce her to come up here to-night.  Do you think she would, Gerald?  I know how difficult it is to get her to go anywhere.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Oh!  I am sure she would, Lady Hunstanton, if she knew Lord Illingworth had made me such an offer.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter Footman with shawl</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I will write and tell her about it, and ask her to come up and meet him.  [<i>To Footman</i>.]  Just wait, Francis.  [<i>Writes letter</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  That is a very wonderful opening for so young a man as you are, Mr. Arbuthnot.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  It is indeed, Lady Caroline.  I trust I shall be able to show myself worthy of it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I trust so.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]  <i>You</i> have not congratulated me yet, Miss Worsley.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Are you very pleased about it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Of course I am.  It means everything to me—things that were out of the reach of hope before may be within hope’s reach now.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Nothing should be out of the reach of hope.  Life is a hope.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I fancy, Caroline, that Diplomacy is what Lord Illingworth is aiming at.  I heard that he was offered Vienna.  But that may not be true.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I don’t think that England should be represented abroad by an unmarried man, Jane.  It might lead to complications.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You are too nervous, Caroline.  Believe me, you are too nervous.  Besides, Lord Illingworth may marry any day.  I was in hopes he would have married lady Kelso.  But I believe he said her family was too large.  Or was it her feet?  I forget which.  I regret it very much.  She was made to be an ambassador’s wife.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  She certainly has a wonderful faculty of remembering people’s names, and forgetting their faces.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, that is very natural, Caroline, is it not?  [<i>To Footman</i>.]  Tell Henry to wait for an answer.  I have written a line to your dear mother, Gerald, to tell her your good news, and to say she really must come to dinner.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit Footman</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  That is awfully kind of you, Lady Hunstanton.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]  Will you come for a stroll, Miss Worsley?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  With pleasure.  [<i>Exit with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I am very much gratified at Gerald Arbuthnot’s good fortune.  He is quite a <i>protégé</i> of mine.  And I am particularly pleased that Lord Illingworth should have made the offer of his own accord without my suggesting anything.  Nobody likes to be asked favours.  I remember poor Charlotte Pagden making herself quite unpopular one season, because she had a French governess she wanted to recommend to every one.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I saw the governess, Jane.  Lady Pagden sent her to me.  It was before Eleanor came out.  She was far too good-looking to be in any respectable household.  I don’t wonder Lady Pagden was so anxious to get rid of her.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, that explains it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John, the grass is too damp for you.  You had better go and put on your overshoes at once.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline, I assure you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You must allow me to be the best judge of that, John.  Pray do as I tell you.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>gets up and goes off</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You spoil him, Caroline, you do indeed!</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
		<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]  Well, dear, I hope you like the park.  It is said to be well timbered.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The trees are wonderful, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Quite, quite wonderful.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  But somehow, I feel sure that if I lived in the country for six months, I should become so unsophisticated that no one would take the slightest notice of me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I assure you, dear, that the country has not that effect at all.  Why, it was from Melthorpe, which is only two miles from here, that Lady Belton eloped with Lord Fethersdale.  I remember the occurrence perfectly.  Poor Lord Belton died three days afterwards of joy, or gout.  I forget which.  We had a large party staying here at the time, so we were all very much interested in the whole affair.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I think to elope is cowardly.  It’s running away from danger.  And danger has become so rare in modern life.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  As far as I can make out, the young women of the present day seem to make it the sole object of their lives to be always playing with fire.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The one advantage of playing with fire, Lady Caroline, is that one never gets even singed.  It is the people who don’t know how to play with it who get burned up.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; I see that.  It is very, very helpful.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I don’t know how the world would get on with such a theory as that, dear Mrs. Allonby.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Ah!  The world was made for men and not for women.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Stutfield.  We have a much better time than they have.  There are far more things forbidden to us than are forbidden to them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; that is quite, quite true.  I had not thought of that.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mr. Kelvil</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, Mr. Kelvil, have you got through your work?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I have finished my writing for the day, Lady Hunstanton.  It has been an arduous task.  The demands on the time of a public man are very heavy nowadays, very heavy indeed.  And I don’t think they meet with adequate recognition.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John, have you got your overshoes on?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Yes, my love.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think you had better come over here, John.  It is more sheltered.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think not, John.  You had better sit beside me.  [<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>rises and goes across</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  And what have you been writing about this morning, Mr. Kelvil?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  On the usual subject, Lady Stutfield.  On Purity.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  That must be such a very, very interesting thing to write about.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  It is the one subject of really national importance, nowadays, Lady Stutfield.  I purpose addressing my constituents on the question before Parliament meets.  I find that the poorer classes of this country display a marked desire for a higher ethical standard.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  How quite, quite nice of them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Are you in favour of women taking part in politics, Mr. Kettle?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  The growing influence of women is the one reassuring thing in our political life, Lady Caroline.  Women are always on the side of morality, public and private.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  It is so very, very gratifying to hear you say that.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, yes!—the moral qualities in women—that is the important thing.  I am afraid, Caroline, that dear Lord Illingworth doesn’t value the moral qualities in women as much as he should.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  The world says that Lord Illingworth is very, very wicked.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  But what world says that, Lady Stutfield?  It must be the next world.  This world and I are on excellent terms.  [<i>Sits down beside</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Every one <i>I</i> know says you are very, very wicked.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is perfectly monstrous the way people go about, nowadays, saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely and entirely true.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Dear Lord Illingworth is quite hopeless, Lady Stutfield.  I have given up trying to reform him.  It would take a Public Company with a Board of Directors and a paid Secretary to do that.  But you have the secretary already, Lord Illingworth, haven’t you?  Gerald Arbuthnot has told us of his good fortune; it is really most kind of you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Hunstanton.  Kind is a dreadful word.  I took a great fancy to young Arbuthnot the moment I met him, and he’ll be of considerable use to me in something I am foolish enough to think of doing.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  He is an admirable young man.  And his mother is one of my dearest friends.  He has just gone for a walk with our pretty American.  She is very pretty, is she not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Far too pretty.  These American girls carry off all the good matches.  Why can’t they stay in their own country?  They are always telling us it is the Paradise of women.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is, Lady Caroline.  That is why, like Eve, they are so extremely anxious to get out of it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Who are Miss Worsley’s parents?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  American women are wonderfully clever in concealing their parents.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Lord Illingworth, what do you mean?  Miss Worsley, Caroline, is an orphan.  Her father was a very wealthy millionaire or philanthropist, or both, I believe, who entertained my son quite hospitably, when he visited Boston.  I don’t know how he made his money, originally.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I fancy in American dry goods.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What are American dry goods?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  American novels.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  How very singular! . . . Well, from whatever source her large fortune came, I have a great esteem for Miss Worsley.  She dresses exceedingly well.  All Americans do dress well.  They get their clothes in Paris.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  They say, Lady Hunstanton, that when good Americans die they go to Paris.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Indeed?  And when bad Americans die, where do they go to?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh, they go to America.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I am afraid you don’t appreciate America, Lord Illingworth.  It is a very remarkable country, especially considering its youth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The youth of America is their oldest tradition.  It has been going on now for three hundred years.  To hear them talk one would imagine they were in their first childhood.  As far as civilisation goes they are in their second.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  There is undoubtedly a great deal of corruption in American politics.  I suppose you allude to that?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I wonder.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Politics are in a sad way everywhere, I am told.  They certainly are in England.  Dear Mr. Cardew is ruining the country.  I wonder Mrs. Cardew allows him.  I am sure, Lord Illingworth, you don’t think that uneducated people should be allowed to have votes?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I think they are the only people who should.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Do you take no side then in modern politics, Lord Illingworth?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should never take sides in anything, Mr. Kelvil.  Taking sides is the beginning of sincerity, and earnestness follows shortly afterwards, and the human being becomes a bore.  However, the House of Commons really does very little harm.  You can’t make people good by Act of Parliament,—that is something.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  You cannot deny that the House of Commons has always shown great sympathy with the sufferings of the poor.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  That is its special vice.  That is the special vice of the age.  One should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of life.  The less said about life’s sores the better, Mr. Kelvil.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Still our East End is a very important problem.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Quite so.  It is the problem of slavery.  And we are trying to solve it by amusing the slaves.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Certainly, a great deal may be done by means of cheap entertainments, as you say, Lord Illingworth.  Dear Dr. Daubeny, our rector here, provides, with the assistance of his curates, really admirable recreations for the poor during the winter.  And much good may be done by means of a magic lantern, or a missionary, or some popular amusement of that kind.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I am not at all in favour of amusements for the poor, Jane.  Blankets and coals are sufficient.  There is too much love of pleasure amongst the upper classes as it is.  Health is what we want in modern life.  The tone is not healthy, not healthy at all.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  You are quite right, Lady Caroline.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I believe I am usually right.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Horrid word ‘health.’</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Silliest word in our language, and one knows so well the popular idea of health.  The English country gentleman galloping after a fox—the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  May I ask, Lord Illingworth, if you regard the House of Lords as a better institution than the House of Commons?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  A much better institution, of course.  We in the House of Lords are never in touch with public opinion.  That makes us a civilised body.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Are you serious in putting forward such a view?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Quite serious, Mr. Kelvil.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]  Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has given them an idea, whether one is serious or not.  Nothing is serious except passion.  The intellect is not a serious thing, and never has been.  It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all.  The only serious form of intellect I know is the British intellect.  And on the British intellect the illiterates play the drum.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What are you saying, Lord Illingworth, about the drum?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was merely talking to Mrs. Allonby about the leading articles in the London newspapers.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But do you believe all that is written in the newspapers?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I do.  Nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.  [<i>Rises with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Are you going, Mrs. Allonby?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Just as far as the conservatory.  Lord Illingworth told me this morning that there was an orchid there as beautiful as the seven deadly sins.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear, I hope there is nothing of the kind.  I will certainly speak to the gardener.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Remarkable type, Mrs. Allonby.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  She lets her clever tongue run away with her sometimes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Is that the only thing, Jane, Mrs. Allonby allows to run away with her?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I hope so, Caroline, I am sure.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
		<p>Dear Lord Alfred, do join us.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span> <i>sits down beside</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You believe good of every one, Jane.  It is a great fault.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Do you really, really think, Lady Caroline, that one should believe evil of every one?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think it is much safer to do so, Lady Stutfield.  Until, of course, people are found out to be good.  But that requires a great deal of investigation nowadays.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But there is so much unkind scandal in modern life.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Lord Illingworth remarked to me last night at dinner that the basis of every scandal is an absolutely immoral certainty.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Lord Illingworth is, of course, a very brilliant man, but he seems to me to be lacking in that fine faith in the nobility and purity of life which is so important in this century.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, quite, quite important, is it not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  He gives me the impression of a man who does not appreciate the beauty of our English home-life.  I would say that he was tainted with foreign ideas on the subject.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  There is nothing, nothing like the beauty of home-life, is there?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  It is the mainstay of our moral system in England, Lady Stutfield.  Without it we would become like our neighbours.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  That would be so, so sad, would it not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I am afraid, too, that Lord Illingworth regards woman simply as a toy.  Now, I have never regarded woman as a toy.  Woman is the intellectual helpmeet of man in public as in private life.  Without her we should forget the true ideals.  [<i>Sits down beside</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I am so very, very glad to hear you say that.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You a married man, Mr. Kettle?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, dear, Kelvil.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  I am married, Lady Caroline.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Family?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Yes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  How many?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  Eight.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> <i>turns her attention to</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Mrs. Kettle and the children are, I suppose, at the seaside?  [<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>shrugs his shoulders</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  My wife is at the seaside with the children, Lady Caroline.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  You will join them later on, no doubt?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  If my public engagements permit me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Your public life must be a great source of gratification to Mrs. Kettle.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]  How very, very charming those gold-tipped cigarettes of yours are, Lord Alfred.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  They are awfully expensive.  I can only afford them when I’m in debt.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  It must be terribly, terribly distressing to be in debt.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  One must have some occupation nowadays.  If I hadn’t my debts I shouldn’t have anything to think about.  All the chaps I know are in debt.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But don’t the people to whom you owe the money give you a great, great deal of annoyance?</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter Footman</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  Oh, no, they write; I don’t.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  How very, very strange.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, here is a letter, Caroline, from dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She won’t dine.  I am so sorry.  But she will come in the evening.  I am very pleased indeed.  She is one of the sweetest of women.  Writes a beautiful hand, too, so large, so firm.  [<i>Hands letter to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  [<i>Looking at it</i>.]  A little lacking in femininity, Jane.  Femininity is the quality I admire most in women.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Taking back letter and leaving it on table</i>.]  Oh! she is very feminine, Caroline, and so good too.  You should hear what the Archdeacon says of her.  He regards her as his right hand in the parish.  [<i>Footman speaks to her</i>.]  In the Yellow Drawing-room.  Shall we all go in?  Lady Stutfield, shall we go in to tea?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  With pleasure, Lady Hunstanton.  [<i>They rise and proceed to go off</i>.  <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> offers to carry <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield’s</span> cloak.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John!  If you would allow your nephew to look after Lady Stutfield’s cloak, you might help me with my workbasket.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Sir John</span>.  Certainly, my love.  [<i>Exeunt</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Curious thing, plain women are always jealous of their husbands, beautiful women never are!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Beautiful women never have time.  They are always so occupied in being jealous of other people’s husbands.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I should have thought Lady Caroline would have grown tired of conjugal anxiety by this time!  Sir John is her fourth!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So much marriage is certainly not becoming.  Twenty years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years of marriage make her something like a public building.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Twenty years of romance!  Is there such a thing?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Not in our day.  Women have become too brilliant.  Nothing spoils a romance so much as a sense of humour in the woman.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Or the want of it in the man.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You are quite right.  In a Temple every one should be serious, except the thing that is worshipped.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  And that should be man?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Women kneel so gracefully; men don’t.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You are thinking of Lady Stutfield!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I assure you I have not thought of Lady Stutfield for the last quarter of an hour.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Is she such a mystery?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  She is more than a mystery—she is a mood.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Moods don’t last.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is their chief charm.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lord Illingworth, every one has been congratulating me, Lady Hunstanton and Lady Caroline, and . . . every one.  I hope I shall make a good secretary.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You will be the pattern secretary, Gerald.  [<i>Talks to him</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You enjoy country life, Miss Worsley?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Very much indeed.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Don’t find yourself longing for a London dinner-party?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I dislike London dinner-parties.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I adore them.  The clever people never listen, and the stupid people never talk.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I think the stupid people talk a great deal.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, I never listen!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear boy, if I didn’t like you I wouldn’t have made you the offer.  It is because I like you so much that I want to have you with me.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p>Charming fellow, Gerald Arbuthnot!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He is very nice; very nice indeed.  But I can’t stand the American young lady.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Why?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  She told me yesterday, and in quite a loud voice too, that she was only eighteen.  It was most annoying.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should never trust a woman who tells one her real age.  A woman who would tell one that, would tell one anything.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  She is a Puritan besides—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Ah, that is inexcusable.  I don’t mind plain women being Puritans.  It is the only excuse they have for being plain.  But she is decidedly pretty.  I admire her immensely.  [<i>Looks steadfastly at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What a thoroughly bad man you must be!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What do you call a bad man?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The sort of man who admires innocence.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And a bad woman?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh! the sort of woman a man never gets tired of.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You are severe—on yourself.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Define us as a sex.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Sphinxes without secrets.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Does that include the Puritan women?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Do you know, I don’t believe in the existence of Puritan women?  I don’t think there is a woman in the world who would not be a little flattered if one made love to her.  It is that which makes women so irresistibly adorable.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You think there is no woman in the world who would object to being kissed?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Very few.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Miss Worsley would not let you kiss her.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Are you sure?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Quite.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What do you think she’d do if I kissed her?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Either marry you, or strike you across the face with her glove.  What would you do if she struck you across the face with her glove?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Fall in love with her, probably.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Then it is lucky you are not going to kiss her!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Is that a challenge?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It is an arrow shot into the air.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Don’t you know that I always succeed in whatever I try?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I am sorry to hear it.  We women adore failures.  They lean on us.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You worship successes.  You cling to them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  We are the laurels to hide their baldness.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And they need you always, except at the moment of triumph.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  They are uninteresting then.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How tantalising you are!  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Lord Illingworth, there is one thing I shall always like you for.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Only one thing?  And I have so many bad qualities.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, don’t be too conceited about them.  You may lose them as you grow old.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I never intend to grow old.  The soul is born old but grows young.  That is the comedy of life.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  And the body is born young and grows old.  That is life’s tragedy.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Its comedy also, sometimes.  But what is the mysterious reason why you will always like me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It is that you have never made love to me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I have never done anything else.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Really?  I have not noticed it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How fortunate!  It might have been a tragedy for both of us.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  We should each have survived.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One can survive everything nowadays, except death, and live down anything except a good reputation.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Have you tried a good reputation?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is one of the many annoyances to which I have never been subjected.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It may come.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Why do you threaten me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I will tell you when you have kissed the Puritan.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter Footman</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Francis</span>.  Tea is served in the Yellow Drawing-room, my lord.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Tell her ladyship we are coming in.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Francis</span>.  Yes, my lord.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Shall we go in to tea?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Do you like such simple pleasures?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I adore simple pleasures.  They are the last refuge of the complex.  But, if you wish, let us stay here.  Yes, let us stay here.  The Book of Life begins with a man and a woman in a garden.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It ends with Revelations.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You fence divinely.  But the button has come off your foil.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I have still the mask.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It makes your eyes lovelier.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Thank you.  Come.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot’s</span> <i>letter on table</i>, <i>and takes it up and looks at envelope</i>.]  What a curious handwriting!  It reminds me of the handwriting of a woman I used to know years ago.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Who?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A woman of no importance.  [<i>Throws letter down</i>, <i>and passes up the steps of the terrace with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  <i>They smile at each other</i>.]</p>
		<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Act Drop</span>.</p>
		<h2>SECOND ACT</h2>
		<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
		<p style="text-align: center"><i>Drawing-room at Hunstanton</i>, <i>after dinner</i>, <i>lamps lit</i>.  <i>Door</i> L.C.  <i>Door</i> R.C.</p>
		<p>[<i>Ladies seated on sofas</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What a comfort it is to have got rid of the men for a little!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; men persecute us dreadfully, don’t they?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Persecute us?  I wish they did.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The annoying thing is that the wretches can be perfectly happy without us.  That is why I think it is every woman’s duty never to leave them alone for a single moment, except during this short breathing space after dinner; without which I believe we poor women would be absolutely worn to shadows.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter Servants with coffee</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Worn to shadows, dear?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton.  It is such a strain keeping men up to the mark.  They are always trying to escape from us.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  It seems to me that it is we who are always trying to escape from them.  Men are so very, very heartless.  They know their power and use it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  [<i>Takes coffee from Servant</i>.]  What stuff and nonsense all this about men is!  The thing to do is to keep men in their proper place.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  But what is their proper place, Lady Caroline?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Looking after their wives, Mrs. Allonby.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Takes coffee from Servant</i>.]  Really?  And if they’re not married?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  If they are not married, they should be looking after a wife.  It’s perfectly scandalous the amount of bachelors who are going about society.  There should be a law passed to compel them all to marry within twelve months.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  [<i>Refuses coffee</i>.]  But if they’re in love with some one who, perhaps, is tied to another?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  In that case, Lady Stutfield, they should be married off in a week to some plain respectable girl, in order to teach them not to meddle with other people’s property.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I don’t think that we should ever be spoken of as other people’s property.  All men are married women’s property.  That is the only true definition of what married women’s property really is.  But we don’t belong to any one.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Oh, I am so very, very glad to hear you say so.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But do you really think, dear Caroline, that legislation would improve matters in any way?  I am told that, nowadays, all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I certainly never know one from the other.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Oh, I think one can always know at once whether a man has home claims upon his life or not.  I have noticed a very, very sad expression in the eyes of so many married men.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, all that I have noticed is that they are horribly tedious when they are good husbands, and abominably conceited when they are not.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, I suppose the type of husband has completely changed since my young days, but I’m bound to state that poor dear Hunstanton was the most delightful of creatures, and as good as gold.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, my husband is a sort of promissory note; I’m tired of meeting him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  But you renew him from time to time, don’t you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh no, Lady Caroline.  I have only had one husband as yet.  I suppose you look upon me as quite an amateur.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  With your views on life I wonder you married at all.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  So do I.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear child, I believe you are really very happy in your married life, but that you like to hide your happiness from others.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I assure you I was horribly deceived in Ernest.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Oh, I hope not, dear.  I knew his mother quite well.  She was a Stratton, Caroline, one of Lord Crowland’s daughters.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Victoria Stratton?  I remember her perfectly.  A silly fair-haired woman with no chin.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, Ernest has a chin.  He has a very strong chin, a square chin.  Ernest’s chin is far too square.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But do you really think a man’s chin can be too square?  I think a man should look very, very strong, and that his chin should be quite, quite square.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Then you should certainly know Ernest, Lady Stutfield.  It is only fair to tell you beforehand he has got no conversation at all.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I adore silent men.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, Ernest isn’t silent.  He talks the whole time.  But he has got no conversation.  What he talks about I don’t know.  I haven’t listened to him for years.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Have you never forgiven him then?  How sad that seems!  But all life is very, very sad, is it not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Life, Lady Stutfield, is simply a <i>mauvais quart d’heure</i> made up of exquisite moments.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, there are moments, certainly.  But was it something very, very wrong that Mr. Allonby did?  Did he become angry with you, and say anything that was unkind or true?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh dear, no.  Ernest is invariably calm.  That is one of the reasons he always gets on my nerves.  Nothing is so aggravating as calmness.  There is something positively brutal about the good temper of most modern men.  I wonder we women stand it as well as we do.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes; men’s good temper shows they are not so sensitive as we are, not so finely strung.  It makes a great barrier often between husband and wife, does it not?  But I would so much like to know what was the wrong thing Mr. Allonby did.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Well, I will tell you, if you solemnly promise to tell everybody else.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Thank you, thank you.  I will make a point of repeating it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  When Ernest and I were engaged, he swore to me positively on his knees that he had never loved any one before in the whole course of his life.  I was very young at the time, so I didn’t believe him, I needn’t tell you.  Unfortunately, however, I made no enquiries of any kind till after I had been actually married four or five months.  I found out then that what he had told me was perfectly true.  And that sort of thing makes a man so absolutely uninteresting.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Men always want to be a woman’s first love.  That is their clumsy vanity.  We women have a more subtle instinct about things.  What we like is to be a man’s last romance.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I see what you mean.  It’s very, very beautiful.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear child, you don’t mean to tell me that you won’t forgive your husband because he never loved any one else?  Did you ever hear such a thing, Caroline?  I am quite surprised.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Oh, women have become so highly educated, Jane, that nothing should surprise us nowadays, except happy marriages.  They apparently are getting remarkably rare.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, they’re quite out of date.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Except amongst the middle classes, I have been told.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  How like the middle classes!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes—is it not?—very, very like them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  If what you tell us about the middle classes is true, Lady Stutfield, it redounds greatly to their credit.  It is much to be regretted that in our rank of life the wife should be so persistently frivolous, under the impression apparently that it is the proper thing to be.  It is to that I attribute the unhappiness of so many marriages we all know of in society.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Do you know, Lady Caroline, I don’t think the frivolity of the wife has ever anything to do with it. More marriages are ruined nowadays by the common sense of the husband than by anything else.  How can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating her as if she were a perfectly rational being?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Man, poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man belongs to a sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years.  He can’t help himself.  It is in his race.  The History of Woman is very different.  We have always been picturesque protests against the mere existence of common sense.  We saw its dangers from the first.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, the common sense of husbands is certainly most, most trying.  Do tell me your conception of the Ideal Husband.  I think it would be so very, very helpful.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The Ideal Husband?  There couldn’t be such a thing.  The institution is wrong.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  The Ideal Man, then, in his relations to <i>us</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  He would probably be extremely realistic.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The Ideal Man!  Oh, the Ideal Man should talk to us as if we were goddesses, and treat us as if we were children.  He should refuse all our serious requests, and gratify every one of our whims.  He should encourage us to have caprices, and forbid us to have missions.  He should always say much more than he means, and always mean much more than he says.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But how could he do both, dear?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He should never run down other pretty women.  That would show he had no taste, or make one suspect that he had too much.  No; he should be nice about them all, but say that somehow they don’t attract him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Yes, that is always very, very pleasant to hear about other women.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  If we ask him a question about anything, he should give us an answer all about ourselves.  He should invariably praise us for whatever qualities he knows we haven’t got.  But he should be pitiless, quite pitiless, in reproaching us for the virtues that we have never dreamed of possessing.  He should never believe that we know the use of useful things.  That would be unforgiveable.  But he should shower on us everything we don’t want.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  As far as I can see, he is to do nothing but pay bills and compliments.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He should persistently compromise us in public, and treat us with absolute respect when we are alone.  And yet he should be always ready to have a perfectly terrible scene, whenever we want one, and to become miserable, absolutely miserable, at a moment’s notice, and to overwhelm us with just reproaches in less than twenty minutes, and to be positively violent at the end of half an hour, and to leave us for ever at a quarter to eight, when we have to go and dress for dinner.  And when, after that, one has seen him for really the last time, and he has refused to take back the little things he has given one, and promised never to communicate with one again, or to write one any foolish letters, he should be perfectly broken-hearted, and telegraph to one all day long, and send one little notes every half-hour by a private hansom, and dine quite alone at the club, so that every one should know how unhappy he was.  And after a whole dreadful week, during which one has gone about everywhere with one’s husband, just to show how absolutely lonely one was, he may be given a third last parting, in the evening, and then, if his conduct has been quite irreproachable, and one has behaved really badly to him, he should be allowed to admit that he has been entirely in the wrong, and when he has admitted that, it becomes a woman’s duty to forgive, and one can do it all over again from the beginning, with variations.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  How clever you are, my dear!  You never mean a single word you say.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Thank you, thank you.  It has been quite, quite entrancing.  I must try and remember it all.  There are such a number of details that are so very, very important.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  But you have not told us yet what the reward of the Ideal Man is to be.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  His reward?  Oh, infinite expectation.  That is quite enough for him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  But men are so terribly, terribly exacting, are they not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  That makes no matter.  One should never surrender.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Not even to the Ideal Man?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Certainly not to him.  Unless, of course, one wants to grow tired of him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Oh! . . . yes.  I see that.  It is very, very helpful.  Do you think, Mrs. Allonby, I shall ever meet the Ideal Man?  Or are there more than one?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  There are just four in London, Lady Stutfield.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Oh, my dear!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Going over to her</i>.]  What has happened?  Do tell me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> [<i>in a low voice</i>]  I had completely forgotten that the American young lady has been in the room all the time.  I am afraid some of this clever talk may have shocked her a little.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, that will do her so much good!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Let us hope she didn’t understand much.  I think I had better go over and talk to her.  [<i>Rises and goes across to</i> <span class="smcap">Hester Worsley</span>.]  Well, dear Miss Worsley. [<i>Sitting down beside her</i>.]  How quiet you have been in your nice little corner all this time!  I suppose you have been reading a book?  There are so many books here in the library.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  No, I have been listening to the conversation.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You mustn’t believe everything that was said, you know, dear.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I didn’t believe any of it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  That is quite right, dear.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Continuing</i>.]  I couldn’t believe that any women could really hold such views of life as I have heard to-night from some of your guests.  [<i>An awkward pause</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I hear you have such pleasant society in America.  Quite like our own in places, my son wrote to me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  There are cliques in America as elsewhere, Lady Hunstanton.  But true American society consists simply of all the good women and good men we have in our country.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What a sensible system, and I dare say quite pleasant too.  I am afraid in England we have too many artificial social barriers.  We don’t see as much as we should of the middle and lower classes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  In America we have no lower classes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Really?  What a very strange arrangement!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What is that dreadful girl talking about?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  She is painfully natural, is she not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  There are a great many things you haven’t got in America, I am told, Miss Worsley.  They say you have no ruins, and no curiosities.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]  What nonsense!  They have their mothers and their manners.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  The English aristocracy supply us with our curiosities, Lady Caroline.  They are sent over to us every summer, regularly, in the steamers, and propose to us the day after they land.  As for ruins, we are trying to build up something that will last longer than brick or stone.  [<i>Gets up to take her fan from table</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What is that, dear?  Ah, yes, an iron Exhibition, is it not, at that place that has the curious name?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Standing by table</i>.]  We are trying to build up life, Lady Hunstanton, on a better, truer, purer basis than life rests on here.  This sounds strange to you all, no doubt.  How could it sound other than strange?  You rich people in England, you don’t know how you are living.  How could you know?  You shut out from your society the gentle and the good.  You laugh at the simple and the pure.  Living, as you all do, on others and by them, you sneer at self-sacrifice, and if you throw bread to the poor, it is merely to keep them quiet for a season.  With all your pomp and wealth and art you don’t know how to live—you don’t even know that.  You love the beauty that you can see and touch and handle, the beauty that you can destroy, and do destroy, but of the unseen beauty of life, of the unseen beauty of a higher life, you know nothing.  You have lost life’s secret.  Oh, your English society seems to me shallow, selfish, foolish.  It has blinded its eyes, and stopped its ears.  It lies like a leper in purple.  It sits like a dead thing smeared with gold.  It is all wrong, all wrong.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  I don’t think one should know of these things.  It is not very, very nice, is it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Miss Worsley, I thought you liked English society so much.  You were such a success in it.  And you were so much admired by the best people.  I quite forget what Lord Henry Weston said of you—but it was most complimentary, and you know what an authority he is on beauty.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Lord Henry Weston!  I remember him, Lady Hunstanton.  A man with a hideous smile and a hideous past.  He is asked everywhere.  No dinner-party is complete without him.  What of those whose ruin is due to him?  They are outcasts.  They are nameless.  If you met them in the street you would turn your head away.  I don’t complain of their punishment.  Let all women who have sinned be punished.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>enters from terrace behind in a cloak with a lace veil over her head</i>.  <i>She hears the last words and starts</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear young lady!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  It is right that they should be punished, but don’t let them be the only ones to suffer.  If a man and woman have sinned, let them both go forth into the desert to love or loathe each other there.  Let them both be branded.  Set a mark, if you wish, on each, but don’t punish the one and let the other go free.  Don’t have one law for men and another for women.  You are unjust to women in England.  And till you count what is a shame in a woman to be an infamy in a man, you will always be unjust, and Right, that pillar of fire, and Wrong, that pillar of cloud, will be made dim to your eyes, or be not seen at all, or if seen, not regarded.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Might I, dear Miss Worsley, as you are standing up, ask you for my cotton that is just behind you?  Thank you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Mrs. Arbuthnot!  I am so pleased you have come up.  But I didn’t hear you announced.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, I came straight in from the terrace, Lady Hunstanton, just as I was.  You didn’t tell me you had a party.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Not a party.  Only a few guests who are staying in the house, and whom you must know.  Allow me.  [<i>Tries to help her</i>.  <i>Rings bell</i>.]  Caroline, this is Mrs. Arbuthnot, one of my sweetest friends.  Lady Caroline Pontefract, Lady Stutfield, Mrs. Allonby, and my young American friend, Miss Worsley, who has just been telling us all how wicked we are.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I am afraid you think I spoke too strongly, Lady Hunstanton.  But there are some things in England—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear young lady, there was a great deal of truth, I dare say, in what you said, and you looked very pretty while you said it, which is much more important, Lord Illingworth would tell us.  The only point where I thought you were a little hard was about Lady Caroline’s brother, about poor Lord Henry.  He is really such good company.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter Footman</i>.]</p>
		<p>Take Mrs. Arbuthnot’s things.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit Footman with wraps</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Lady Caroline, I had no idea it was your brother.  I am sorry for the pain I must have caused you—I—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  My dear Miss Worsley, the only part of your little speech, if I may so term it, with which I thoroughly agreed, was the part about my brother.  Nothing that you could possibly say could be too bad for him.  I regard Henry as infamous, absolutely infamous.  But I am bound to state, as you were remarking, Jane, that he is excellent company, and he has one of the best cooks in London, and after a good dinner one can forgive anybody, even one’s own relations.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> [<i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Miss Worsley</span>]  Now, do come, dear, and make friends with Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She is one of the good, sweet, simple people you told us we never admitted into society.  I am sorry to say Mrs. Arbuthnot comes very rarely to me.  But that is not my fault.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  What a bore it is the men staying so long after dinner!  I expect they are saying the most dreadful things about us.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  Do you really think so?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I was sure of it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  How very, very horrid of them!  Shall we go onto the terrace?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, anything to get away from the dowagers and the dowdies.  [<i>Rises and goes with</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> <i>to door</i> L.C.]  We are only going to look at the stars, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You will find a great many, dear, a great many.  But don’t catch cold.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  We shall all miss Gerald so much, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But has Lord Illingworth really offered to make Gerald his secretary?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Oh, yes!  He has been most charming about it.  He has the highest possible opinion of your boy.  You don’t know Lord Illingworth, I believe, dear.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have never met him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You know him by name, no doubt?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I am afraid I don’t.  I live so much out of the world, and see so few people.  I remember hearing years ago of an old Lord Illingworth who lived in Yorkshire, I think.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, yes.  That would be the last Earl but one.  He was a very curious man.  He wanted to marry beneath him.  Or wouldn’t, I believe.  There was some scandal about it.  The present Lord Illingworth is quite different.  He is very distinguished.  He does—well, he does nothing, which I am afraid our pretty American visitor here thinks very wrong of anybody, and I don’t know that he cares much for the subjects in which you are so interested, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  Do you think, Caroline, that Lord Illingworth is interested in the Housing of the Poor?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I should fancy not at all, Jane.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  We all have our different tastes, have we not?  But Lord Illingworth has a very high position, and there is nothing he couldn’t get if he chose to ask for it.  Of course, he is comparatively a young man still, and he has only come to his title within—how long exactly is it, Caroline, since Lord Illingworth succeeded?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  About four years, I think, Jane.  I know it was the same year in which my brother had his last exposure in the evening newspapers.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, I remember.  That would be about four years ago.  Of course, there were a great many people between the present Lord Illingworth and the title, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  There was—who was there, Caroline?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  There was poor Margaret’s baby.  You remember how anxious she was to have a boy, and it was a boy, but it died, and her husband died shortly afterwards, and she married almost immediately one of Lord Ascot’s sons, who, I am told, beats her.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, that is in the family, dear, that is in the family.  And there was also, I remember, a clergyman who wanted to be a lunatic, or a lunatic who wanted to be a clergyman, I forget which, but I know the Court of Chancery investigated the matter, and decided that he was quite sane.  And I saw him afterwards at poor Lord Plumstead’s with straws in his hair, or something very odd about him.  I can’t recall what.  I often regret, Lady Caroline, that dear Lady Cecilia never lived to see her son get the title.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lady Cecilia?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Lord Illingworth’s mother, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, was one of the Duchess of Jerningham’s pretty daughters, and she married Sir Thomas Harford, who wasn’t considered a very good match for her at the time, though he was said to be the handsomest man in London.  I knew them all quite intimately, and both the sons, Arthur and George.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It was the eldest son who succeeded, of course, Lady Hunstanton?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  No, dear, he was killed in the hunting field.  Or was it fishing, Caroline?  I forget.  But George came in for everything.  I always tell him that no younger son has ever had such good luck as he has had.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lady Hunstanton, I want to speak to Gerald at once.  Might I see him?  Can he be sent for?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Certainly, dear.  I will send one of the servants into the dining-room to fetch him.  I don’t know what keeps the gentlemen so long.  [<i>Rings bell</i>.]  When I knew Lord Illingworth first as plain George Harford, he was simply a very brilliant young man about town, with not a penny of money except what poor dear Lady Cecilia gave him.  She was quite devoted to him.  Chiefly, I fancy, because he was on bad terms with his father.  Oh, here is the dear Archdeacon.  [<i>To Servant</i>.]  It doesn’t matter.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Doctor Daubeny</span>.  <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>goes over to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>, <span class="smcap">Doctor Daubeny</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Lord Illingworth has been most entertaining.  I have never enjoyed myself more.  [<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Ah, Mrs. Arbuthnot.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Doctor Baubeny</span>.]  You see I have got Mrs. Arbuthnot to come to me at last.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  That is a great honour, Lady Hunstanton.  Mrs. Daubeny will be quite jealous of you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, I am so sorry Mrs. Daubeny could not come with you to-night.  Headache as usual, I suppose.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton; a perfect martyr.  But she is happiest alone.  She is happiest alone.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  [<i>To her husband</i>.]  John!  [<span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>goes over to his wife</i>.  <span class="smcap">Doctor Baubeny</span> <i>talks to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> watches <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> the whole time.  He has passed across the room without noticing her, and approaches <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>, who with <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> is standing by the door looking on to the terrace.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How is the most charming woman in the world?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [Taking <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> by the hand.]  We are both quite well, thank you, Lord Illingworth.  But what a short time you have been in the dining-room!  It seems as if we had only just left.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was bored to death.  Never opened my lips the whole time.  Absolutely longing to come in to you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You should have.  The American girl has been giving us a lecture.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Really?  All Americans lecture, I believe.  I suppose it is something in their climate.  What did she lecture about?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Oh, Puritanism, of course.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I am going to convert her, am I not?  How long do you give me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  A week.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  A week is more than enough.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Going to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Dear mother!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald, I don’t feel at all well.  See me home, Gerald.  I shouldn’t have come.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I am so sorry, mother.  Certainly.  But you must know Lord Illingworth first.  [<i>Goes across room</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Not to-night, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lord Illingworth, I want you so much to know my mother.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  With the greatest pleasure.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]  I’ll be back in a moment.  People’s mothers always bore me to death.  All women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  No man does.  That is his.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What a delightful mood you are in to-night!  [<i>Turns round and goes across with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  <i>When he sees her</i>, <i>he starts back in wonder</i>.  <i>Then slowly his eyes turn towards</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, this is Lord Illingworth, who has offered to take me as his private secretary.  [<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>bows coldly</i>.]  It is a wonderful opening for me, isn’t it?  I hope he won’t be disappointed in me, that is all.  You’ll thank Lord Illingworth, mother, won’t you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lord Illingworth in very good, I am sure, to interest himself in you for the moment.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Putting his hand on</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald’s</span> <i>shoulder</i>.]  Oh, Gerald and I are great friends already, Mrs . . . Arbuthnot.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  There can be nothing in common between you and my son, Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Dear mother, how can you say so?  Of course Lord Illingworth is awfully clever and that sort of thing.  There is nothing Lord Illingworth doesn’t know.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear boy!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  He knows more about life than any one I have ever met.  I feel an awful duffer when I am with you, Lord Illingworth.  Of course, I have had so few advantages.  I have not been to Eton or Oxford like other chaps.  But Lord Illingworth doesn’t seem to mind that.  He has been awfully good to me, mother.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lord Illingworth may change his mind.  He may not really want you as his secretary.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You must remember, as you said yourself, you have had so few advantages.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Lord Illingworth, I want to speak to you for a moment.  Do come over.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Will you excuse me, Mrs. Arbuthnot?  Now, don’t let your charming mother make any more difficulties, Gerald.  The thing is quite settled, isn’t it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I hope so.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>goes across to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I thought you were never going to leave the lady in black velvet.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  She is excessively handsome.  [<i>Looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Caroline, shall we all make a move to the music-room?  Miss Worsley is going to play.  You’ll come too, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, won’t you?  You don’t know what a treat is in store for you.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Doctor Baubeny</span>.]  I must really take Miss Worsley down some afternoon to the rectory.  I should so much like dear Mrs. Daubeny to hear her on the violin.  Ah, I forgot.  Dear Mrs. Daubeny’s hearing is a little defective, is it not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Her deafness is a great privation to her.  She can’t even hear my sermons now.  She reads them at home.  But she has many resources in herself, many resources.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  She reads a good deal, I suppose?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  Just the very largest print.  The eyesight is rapidly going.  But she’s never morbid, never morbid.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]  Do speak to my mother, Lord Illingworth, before you go into the music-room.  She seems to think, somehow, you don’t mean what you said to me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Aren’t you coming?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  In a few moments.  Lady Hunstanton, if Mrs. Arbuthnot would allow me, I would like to say a few words to her, and we will join you later on.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, of course.  You will have a great deal to say to her, and she will have a great deal to thank you for.  It is not every son who gets such an offer, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  But I know you appreciate that, dear.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  John!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Now, don’t keep Mrs. Arbuthnot too long, Lord Illingworth.  We can’t spare her.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit following the other guests</i>.  <i>Sound of violin heard from music-room</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So that is our son, Rachel!  Well, I am very proud of him.  He in a Harford, every inch of him.  By the way, why Arbuthnot, Rachel?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  One name is as good as another, when one has no right to any name.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I suppose so—but why Gerald?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  After a man whose heart I broke—after my father.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Well, Rachel, what is over is over.  All I have got to say now in that I am very, very much pleased with our boy.  The world will know him merely as my private secretary, but to me he will be something very near, and very dear.  It is a curious thing, Rachel; my life seemed to be quite complete.  It was not so.  It lacked something, it lacked a son.  I have found my son now, I am glad I have found him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You have no right to claim him, or the smallest part of him.  The boy is entirely mine, and shall remain mine.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Rachel, you have had him to yourself for over twenty years.  Why not let me have him for a little now?  He is quite as much mine as yours.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Are you talking of the child you abandoned?  Of the child who, as far as you are concerned, might have died of hunger and of want?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You forget, Rachel, it was you who left me.  It was not I who left you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I left you because you refused to give the child a name.  Before my son was born, I implored you to marry me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I had no expectations then.  And besides, Rachel, I wasn’t much older than you were.  I was only twenty-two.  I was twenty-one, I believe, when the whole thing began in your father’s garden.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  When a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old enough to do right also.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Rachel, intellectual generalities are always interesting, but generalities in morals mean absolutely nothing.  As for saying I left our child to starve, that, of course, is untrue and silly.  My mother offered you six hundred a year.  But you wouldn’t take anything.  You simply disappeared, and carried the child away with you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I wouldn’t have accepted a penny from her.  Your father was different.  He told you, in my presence, when we were in Paris, that it was your duty to marry me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh, duty is what one expects from others, it is not what one does oneself.  Of course, I was influenced by my mother.  Every man is when he is young.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I am glad to hear you say so.  Gerald shall certainly not go away with you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What nonsense, Rachel!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Do you think I would allow my son—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  <i>Our</i> son.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  My son [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>shrugs his shoulders</i>]—to go away with the man who spoiled my youth, who ruined my life, who has tainted every moment of my days?  You don’t realise what my past has been in suffering and in shame.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Rachel, I must candidly say that I think Gerald’s future considerably more important than your past.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald cannot separate his future from my past.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  That is exactly what he should do.  That is exactly what you should help him to do.  What a typical woman you are!  You talk sentimentally, and you are thoroughly selfish the whole time.  But don’t let us have a scene.  Rachel, I want you to look at this matter from the common-sense point of view, from the point of view of what is best for our son, leaving you and me out of the question.  What is our son at present?  An underpaid clerk in a small Provincial Bank in a third-rate English town.  If you imagine he is quite happy in such a position, you are mistaken.  He is thoroughly discontented.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He was not discontented till he met you.  You have made him so.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Of course, I made him so.  Discontent is the first step in the progress of a man or a nation.  But I did not leave him with a mere longing for things he could not get.  No, I made him a charming offer.  He jumped at it, I need hardly say.  Any young man would.  And now, simply because it turns out that I am the boy’s own father and he my own son, you propose practically to ruin his career.  That is to say, if I were a perfect stranger, you would allow Gerald to go away with me, but as he is my own flesh and blood you won’t.  How utterly illogical you are!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not allow him to go.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How can you prevent it?  What excuse can you give to him for making him decline such an offer as mine?  I won’t tell him in what relations I stand to him, I need hardly say.  But you daren’t tell him.  You know that.  Look how you have brought him up.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have brought him up to be a good man.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Quite so.  And what is the result?  You have educated him to be your judge if he ever finds you out.  And a bitter, an unjust judge he will be to you.  Don’t be deceived, Rachel.  Children begin by loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely, if ever, do they forgive them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  George, don’t take my son away from me.  I have had twenty years of sorrow, and I have only had one thing to love me, only one thing to love.  You have had a life of joy, and pleasure, and success.  You have been quite happy, you have never thought of us.  There was no reason, according to your views of life, why you should have remembered us at all.  Your meeting us was a mere accident, a horrible accident.  Forget it.  Don’t come now, and rob me of . . . of all I have in the whole world.  You are so rich in other things.  Leave me the little vineyard of my life; leave me the walled-in garden and the well of water; the ewe-lamb God sent me, in pity or in wrath, oh! leave me that.  George, don’t take Gerald from me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Rachel, at the present moment you are not necessary to Gerald’s career; I am.  There is nothing more to be said on the subject.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not let him go.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Here is Gerald.  He has a right to decide for himself.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Well, dear mother, I hope you have settled it all with Lord Illingworth?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have not, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Your mother seems not to like your coming with me, for some reason.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Why, mother?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I thought you were quite happy here with me, Gerald.  I didn’t know you were so anxious to leave me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, how can you talk like that?  Of course I have been quite happy with you.  But a man can’t stay always with his mother.  No chap does.  I want to make myself a position, to do something.  I thought you would have been proud to see me Lord Illingworth’s secretary.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I do not think you would be suitable as a private secretary to Lord Illingworth.  You have no qualifications.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I don’t wish to seem to interfere for a moment, Mrs. Arbuthnot, but as far as your last objection is concerned, I surely am the best judge.  And I can only tell you that your son has all the qualifications I had hoped for.  He has more, in fact, than I had even thought of.  Far more.  [<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>remains silent</i>.]  Have you any other reason, Mrs. Arbuthnot, why you don’t wish your son to accept this post?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Have you, mother?  Do answer.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  If you have, Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray, pray say it.  We are quite by ourselves here.  Whatever it is, I need not say I will not repeat it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  If you would like to be alone with your son, I will leave you.  You may have some other reason you don’t wish me to hear.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have no other reason.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Then, my dear boy, we may look on the thing as settled.  Come, you and I will smoke a cigarette on the terrace together.  And Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray let me tell you, that I think you have acted very, very wisely.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit with</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>is left alone</i>.  <i>She stands immobile with a look of unutterable sorrow on her face</i>.]</p>
		<p style="text-align: center">
			<span class="smcap">Act Drop</span>
		</p>
		<h2>THIRD ACT</h2>
		<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
		<p style="text-align: center"><i>The Picture Gallery at Hunstanton</i>.  <i>Door at back leading on to terrace</i>.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>, R.C.  <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>lolling on a sofa</i>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>in a chair</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Thoroughly sensible woman, your mother, Gerald.  I knew she would come round in the end.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  My mother is awfully conscientious, Lord Illingworth, and I know she doesn’t think I am educated enough to be your secretary.  She is perfectly right, too.  I was fearfully idle when I was at school, and I couldn’t pass an examination now to save my life.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  My dear Gerald, examinations are of no value whatsoever.  If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But I am so ignorant of the world, Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Don’t be afraid, Gerald.  Remember that you’ve got on your side the most wonderful thing in the world—youth!  There is nothing like youth.  The middle-aged are mortgaged to Life.  The old are in life’s lumber-room.  But youth is the Lord of Life.  Youth has a kingdom waiting for it.  Every one is born a king, and most people die in exile, like most kings.  To win back my youth, Gerald, there is nothing I wouldn’t do—except take exercise, get up early, or be a useful member of the community.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But you don’t call yourself old, Lord Illingworth?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I am old enough to be your father, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t remember my father; he died years ago.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So Lady Hunstanton told me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  It is very curious, my mother never talks to me about my father.  I sometimes think she must have married beneath her.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Winces slightly</i>.]  Really?  [<i>Goes over and puts his hand on</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald’s</span> <i>shoulder</i>.]  You have missed not having a father, I suppose, Gerald?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Oh, no; my mother has been so good to me.  No one ever had such a mother as I have had.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I am quite sure of that.  Still I should imagine that most mothers don’t quite understand their sons.  Don’t realise, I mean, that a son has ambitions, a desire to see life, to make himself a name.  After all, Gerald, you couldn’t be expected to pass all your life in such a hole as Wrockley, could you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Oh, no!  It would be dreadful!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  A mother’s love is very touching, of course, but it is often curiously selfish.  I mean, there is a good deal of selfishness in it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Slowly</i>.]  I suppose there is.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Your mother is a thoroughly good woman.  But good women have such limited views of life, their horizon is so small, their interests are so petty, aren’t they?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  They are awfully interested, certainly, in things we don’t care much about.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I suppose your mother is very religious, and that sort of thing.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Oh, yes, she’s always going to church.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Ah! she is not modern, and to be modern is the only thing worth being nowadays.  You want to be modern, don’t you, Gerald?  You want to know life as it really is.  Not to be put off with any old-fashioned theories about life.  Well, what you have to do at present is simply to fit yourself for the best society.  A man who can dominate a London dinner-table can dominate the world.  The future belongs to the dandy.  It is the exquisites who are going to rule.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I should like to wear nice things awfully, but I have always been told that a man should not think too much about his clothes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  People nowadays are so absolutely superficial that they don’t understand the philosophy of the superficial.  By the way, Gerald, you should learn how to tie your tie better.  Sentiment is all very well for the button-hole.  But the essential thing for a necktie is style.  A well-tied tie is the first serious step in life.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Laughing</i>.]  I might be able to learn how to tie a tie, Lord Illingworth, but I should never be able to talk as you do.  I don’t know how to talk.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Oh! talk to every woman as if you loved her, and to every man as if he bored you, and at the end of your first season you will have the reputation of possessing the most perfect social tact.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But it is very difficult to get into society isn’t it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  To get into the best society, nowadays, one has either to feed people, amuse people, or shock people—that is all!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I suppose society is wonderfully delightful!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  To be in it is merely a bore.  But to be out of it simply a tragedy.  Society is a necessary thing.  No man has any real success in this world unless he has got women to back him, and women rule society.  If you have not got women on your side you are quite over.  You might just as well be a barrister, or a stockbroker, or a journalist at once.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  It is very difficult to understand women, is it not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You should never try to understand them.  Women are pictures.  Men are problems.  If you want to know what a woman really means—which, by the way, is always a dangerous thing to do—look at her, don’t listen to her.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But women are awfully clever, aren’t they?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should always tell them so.  But, to the philosopher, my dear Gerald, women represent the triumph of matter over mind—just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  How then can women have so much power as you say they have?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The history of women is the history of the worst form of tyranny the world has ever known.  The tyranny of the weak over the strong.  It is the only tyranny that lasts.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But haven’t women got a refining influence?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Nothing refines but the intellect.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Still, there are many different kinds of women, aren’t there?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Only two kinds in society: the plain and the coloured.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But there are good women in society, aren’t there?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Far too many.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But do you think women shouldn’t be good?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should never tell them so, they’d all become good at once.  Women are a fascinatingly wilful sex.  Every woman is a rebel, and usually in wild revolt against herself.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  You have never been married, Lord Illingworth, have you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Men marry because they are tired; women because they are curious.  Both are disappointed.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But don’t you think one can be happy when one is married?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Perfectly happy.  But the happiness of a married man, my dear Gerald, depends on the people he has not married.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But if one is in love?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  One should always be in love.  That is the reason one should never marry.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Love is a very wonderful thing, isn’t it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  When one is in love one begins by deceiving oneself.  And one ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls a romance.  But a really <i>grande passion</i> is comparatively rare nowadays.  It is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.  That is the one use of the idle classes in a country, and the only possible explanation of us Harfords.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Harfords, Lord Illingworth?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  That is my family name.  You should study the Peerage, Gerald.  It is the one book a young man about town should know thoroughly, and it is the best thing in fiction the English have ever done.  And now, Gerald, you are going into a perfectly new life with me, and I want you to know how to live.  [<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>appears on terrace behind</i>.]  For the world has been made by fools that wise men should live in it!</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> L.C. <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dr. Daubeny</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! here you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  Well, I suppose you have been telling our young friend, Gerald, what his new duties are to be, and giving him a great deal of good advice over a pleasant cigarette.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I have been giving him the best of advice, Lady Hunstanton, and the best of cigarettes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I am so sorry I was not here to listen to you, but I suppose I am too old now to learn.  Except from you, dear Archdeacon, when you are in your nice pulpit.  But then I always know what you are going to say, so I don’t feel alarmed.  [<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Ah! dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, do come and join us.  Come, dear.  [<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Gerald has been having such a long talk with Lord Illingworth; I am sure you must feel very much flattered at the pleasant way in which everything has turned out for him.  Let us sit down.  [<i>They sit down</i>.]  And how is your beautiful embroidery going on?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I am always at work, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Mrs. Daubeny embroiders a little, too, doesn’t she?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  She was very deft with her needle once, quite a Dorcas.  But the gout has crippled her fingers a good deal.  She has not touched the tambour frame for nine or ten years.  But she has many other amusements.  She is very much interested in her own health.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! that is always a nice distraction, in it not?  Now, what are you talking about, Lord Illingworth?  Do tell us.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was on the point of explaining to Gerald that the world has always laughed at its own tragedies, that being the only way in which it has been able to bear them.  And that, consequently, whatever the world has treated seriously belongs to the comedy side of things.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Now I am quite out of my depth.  I usually am when Lord Illingworth says anything.  And the Humane Society is most careless.  They never rescue me.  I am left to sink.  I have a dim idea, dear Lord Illingworth, that you are always on the side of the sinners, and I know I always try to be on the side of the saints, but that is as far as I get.  And after all, it may be merely the fancy of a drowning person.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The only difference between the saint and the sinner is that every saint has a past, and every sinner has a future.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! that quite does for me.  I haven’t a word to say.  You and I, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, are behind the age.  We can’t follow Lord Illingworth.  Too much care was taken with our education, I am afraid.  To have been well brought up is a great drawback nowadays.  It shuts one out from so much.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I should be sorry to follow Lord Illingworth in any of his opinions.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You are quite right, dear.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>shrugs his shoulders and looks irritably over at his mother</i>.  <i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Jane, have you seen John anywhere?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  You needn’t be anxious about him, dear.  He is with Lady Stutfield; I saw them some time ago, in the Yellow Drawing-room.  They seem quite happy together.  You are not going, Caroline?  Pray sit down.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  I think I had better look after John.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  It doesn’t do to pay men so much attention.  And Caroline has really nothing to be anxious about.  Lady Stutfield is very sympathetic.  She is just as sympathetic about one thing as she is about another.  A beautiful nature.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p>Ah! here is Sir John!  And with Mrs. Allonby too!  I suppose it was Mrs. Allonby I saw him with.  Sir John, Caroline has been looking everywhere for you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  We have been waiting for her in the Music-room, dear Lady Hunstanton.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! the Music-room, of course.  I thought it was the Yellow Drawing-room, my memory is getting so defective.  [<i>To the</i> <span class="smcap">Archdeacon</span>.]  Mrs. Daubeny has a wonderful memory, hasn’t she?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  She used to be quite remarkable for her memory, but since her last attack she recalls chiefly the events of her early childhood.  But she finds great pleasure in such retrospections, great pleasure.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mr. Kelvil</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! dear Lady Stutfield! and what has Mr. Kelvil been talking to you about?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  About Bimetallism, as well as I remember.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Bimetallism!  Is that quite a nice subject?  However, I know people discuss everything very freely nowadays.  What did Sir John talk to you about, dear Mrs. Allonby?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  About Patagonia.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Really?  What a remote topic!  But very improving, I have no doubt.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  He has been most interesting on the subject of Patagonia.  Savages seem to have quite the same views as cultured people on almost all subjects.  They are excessively advanced.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What do they do?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Apparently everything.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, it is very gratifying, dear Archdeacon, is it not, to find that Human Nature is permanently one.—On the whole, the world is the same world, is it not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The world is simply divided into two classes—those who believe the incredible, like the public—and those who do the improbable—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Like yourself?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Yes; I am always astonishing myself.  It is the only thing that makes life worth living.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  And what have you been doing lately that astonishes you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I have been discovering all kinds of beautiful qualities in my own nature.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah! don’t become quite perfect all at once.  Do it gradually!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I don’t intend to grow perfect at all.  At least, I hope I shan’t.  It would be most inconvenient.  Women love us for our defects.  If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our gigantic intellects.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It is premature to ask us to forgive analysis.  We forgive adoration; that is quite as much as should be expected from us.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.  <i>He joins</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! we women should forgive everything, shouldn’t we, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot?  I am sure you agree with me in that.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I do not, Lady Hunstanton.  I think there are many things women should never forgive.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  What sort of things?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  The ruin of another woman’s life.</p>
		<p>[<i>Moves slowly away to back of stage</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah! those things are very sad, no doubt, but I believe there are admirable homes where people of that kind are looked after and reformed, and I think on the whole that the secret of life is to take things very, very easily.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  The secret of life is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.  The secret of life is to appreciate the pleasure of being terribly, terribly deceived.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Kelvil</span>.  The secret of life is to resist temptation, Lady Stutfield.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  There is no secret of life.  Life’s aim, if it has one, is simply to be always looking for temptations.  There are not nearly enough.  I sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a single one.  It is quite dreadful.  It makes one so nervous about the future.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Shakes her fan at him</i>.]  I don’t know how it is, dear Lord Illingworth, but everything you have said to-day seems to me excessively immoral.  It has been most interesting, listening to you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  All thought is immoral.  Its very essence is destruction.  If you think of anything, you kill it.  Nothing survives being thought of.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I don’t understand a word, Lord Illingworth.  But I have no doubt it is all quite true.  Personally, I have very little to reproach myself with, on the score of thinking.  I don’t believe in women thinking too much.  Women should think in moderation, as they should do all things in moderation.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Moderation is a fatal thing, Lady Hunstanton.  Nothing succeeds like excess.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I hope I shall remember that.  It sounds an admirable maxim.  But I’m beginning to forget everything.  It’s a great misfortune.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is one of your most fascinating qualities, Lady Hunstanton.  No woman should have a memory.  Memory in a woman is the beginning of dowdiness.  One can always tell from a woman’s bonnet whether she has got a memory or not.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  How charming you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  You always find out that one’s most glaring fault is one’s most important virtue.  You have the most comforting views of life.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Farquhar</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Farquhar</span>.  Doctor Daubeny’s carriage!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear Archdeacon!  It is only half-past ten.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  I am afraid I must go, Lady Hunstanton.  Tuesday is always one of Mrs. Daubeny’s bad nights.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  Well, I won’t keep you from her.  [<i>Goes with him towards door</i>.]  I have told Farquhar to put a brace of partridge into the carriage.  Mrs. Daubeny may fancy them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">The Archdeacon</span>.  It is very kind of you, but Mrs. Daubeny never touches solids now.  Lives entirely on jellies.  But she is wonderfully cheerful, wonderfully cheerful.  She has nothing to complain of.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit with</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Goes over to</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.]  There is a beautiful moon to-night.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Let us go and look at it.  To look at anything that is inconstant is charming nowadays.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  You have your looking-glass.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is unkind.  It merely shows me my wrinkles.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Mine is better behaved.  It never tells me the truth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Then it is in love with you.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span>, <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>, <span class="smcap">Mr. Kelvil</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Alfred</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>]  May I come too?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Do, my dear boy.  [<i>Moves towards door with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span> <i>enters</i>, <i>looks rapidly round and goes off in opposite direction to that taken by</i> <span class="smcap">Sir John</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Stutfield</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  What, mother!</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It is getting late.  Let us go home.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  My dear mother.  Do let us wait a little longer.  Lord Illingworth is so delightful, and, by the way, mother, I have a great surprise for you.  We are starting for India at the end of this month.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Let us go home.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  If you really want to, of course, mother, but I must bid good-bye to Lord Illingworth first.  I’ll be back in five minutes.  [<i>Exit</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Let him leave me if he chooses, but not with him—not with him!  I couldn’t bear it.  [<i>Walks up and down</i>.]</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  What a lovely night it is, Mrs. Arbuthnot.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Is it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Mrs. Arbuthnot, I wish you would let us be friends.  You are so different from the other women here.  When you came into the Drawing-room this evening, somehow you brought with you a sense of what is good and pure in life.  I had been foolish.  There are things that are right to say, but that may be said at the wrong time and to the wrong people.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I heard what you said.  I agree with it, Miss Worsley.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I didn’t know you had heard it.  But I knew you would agree with me.  A woman who has sinned should be punished, shouldn’t she?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  She shouldn’t be allowed to come into the society of good men and women?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  She should not.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  And the man should be punished in the same way?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  In the same way.  And the children, if there are children, in the same way also?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Yes, it is right that the sins of the parents should be visited on the children.  It is a just law.  It is God’s law.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It is one of God’s terrible laws.</p>
		<p>[<i>Moves away to fireplace</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  You are distressed about your son leaving you, Mrs. Arbuthnot?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Do you like him going away with Lord Illingworth?  Of course there is position, no doubt, and money, but position and money are not everything, are they?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  They are nothing; they bring misery.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Then why do you let your son go with him?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He wishes it himself.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  But if you asked him he would stay, would he not?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He has set his heart on going.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  He couldn’t refuse you anything.  He loves you too much.  Ask him to stay.  Let me send him in to you.  He is on the terrace at this moment with Lord Illingworth.  I heard them laughing together as I passed through the Music-room.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Don’t trouble, Miss Worsley, I can wait.  It is of no consequence.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  No, I’ll tell him you want him.  Do—do ask him to stay.  [<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He won’t come—I know he won’t come.</p>
		<p>[Enter <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  <i>She looks round anxiously</i>.  <i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  Mr. Arbuthnot, may I ask you is Sir John anywhere on the terrace?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  No, Lady Caroline, he is not on the terrace.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.  It is very curious.  It is time for him to retire.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Caroline</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Dear mother, I am afraid I kept you waiting.  I forgot all about it.  I am so happy to-night, mother; I have never been so happy.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  At the prospect of going away?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Don’t put it like that, mother.  Of course I am sorry to leave you.  Why, you are the best mother in the whole world.  But after all, as Lord Illingworth says, it is impossible to live in such a place as Wrockley.  You don’t mind it.  But I’m ambitious; I want something more than that.  I want to have a career.  I want to do something that will make you proud of me, and Lord Illingworth is going to help me.  He is going to do everything for me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald, don’t go away with Lord Illingworth.  I implore you not to.  Gerald, I beg you!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, how changeable you are!  You don’t seem to know your own mind for a single moment.  An hour and a half ago in the Drawing-room you agreed to the whole thing; now you turn round and make objections, and try to force me to give up my one chance in life.  Yes, my one chance.  You don’t suppose that men like Lord Illingworth are to be found every day, do you, mother?  It is very strange that when I have had such a wonderful piece of good luck, the one person to put difficulties in my way should be my own mother.  Besides, you know, mother, I love Hester Worsley.  Who could help loving her?  I love her more than I have ever told you, far more.  And if I had a position, if I had prospects, I could—I could ask her to—Don’t you understand now, mother, what it means to me to be Lord Illingworth’s secretary?  To start like that is to find a career ready for one—before one—waiting for one.  If I were Lord Illingworth’s secretary I could ask Hester to be my wife.  As a wretched bank clerk with a hundred a year it would be an impertinence.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I fear you need have no hopes of Miss Worsley.  I know her views on life.  She has just told them to me.  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Then I have my ambition left, at any rate.  That is something—I am glad I have that!  You have always tried to crush my ambition, mother—haven’t you?  You have told me that the world is a wicked place, that success is not worth having, that society is shallow, and all that sort of thing—well, I don’t believe it, mother.  I think the world must be delightful.  I think society must be exquisite.  I think success is a thing worth having.  You have been wrong in all that you taught me, mother, quite wrong.  Lord Illingworth is a successful man.  He is a fashionable man.  He is a man who lives in the world and for it.  Well, I would give anything to be just like Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I would sooner see you dead.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, what is your objection to Lord Illingworth?  Tell me—tell me right out.  What is it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He is a bad man.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  In what way bad?  I don’t understand what you mean.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will tell you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I suppose you think him bad, because he doesn’t believe the same things as you do.  Well, men are different from women, mother.  It is natural that they should have different views.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It is not what Lord Illingworth believes, or what he does not believe, that makes him bad.  It is what he is.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, is it something you know of him?  Something you actually know?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It is something I know.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Something you are quite sure of?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Quite sure of.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  How long have you known it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  For twenty years.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Is it fair to go back twenty years in any man’s career?  And what have you or I to do with Lord Illingworth’s early life?  What business is it of ours?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What this man has been, he is now, and will be always.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, tell me what Lord Illingworth did?  If he did anything shameful, I will not go away with him.  Surely you know me well enough for that?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald, come near to me.  Quite close to me, as you used to do when you were a little boy, when you were mother’s own boy.  [<span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>sits down beside his mother</i>.  <i>She runs her fingers through his hair</i>, <i>and strokes his hands</i>.]  Gerald, there was a girl once, she was very young, she was little over eighteen at the time.  George Harford—that was Lord Illingworth’s name then—George Harford met her.  She knew nothing about life.  He—knew everything.  He made this girl love him.  He made her love him so much that she left her father’s house with him one morning.  She loved him so much, and he had promised to marry her!  He had solemnly promised to marry her, and she had believed him.  She was very young, and—and ignorant of what life really is.  But he put the marriage off from week to week, and month to month.—She trusted in him all the while.  She loved him.—Before her child was born—for she had a child—she implored him for the child’s sake to marry her, that the child might have a name, that her sin might not be visited on the child, who was innocent.  He refused.  After the child was born she left him, taking the child away, and her life was ruined, and her soul ruined, and all that was sweet, and good, and pure in her ruined also.  She suffered terribly—she suffers now.  She will always suffer.  For her there is no joy, no peace, no atonement.  She is a woman who drags a chain like a guilty thing.  She is a woman who wears a mask, like a thing that is a leper.  The fire cannot purify her.  The waters cannot quench her anguish.  Nothing can heal her! no anodyne can give her sleep! no poppies forgetfulness!  She is lost!  She is a lost soul!—That is why I call Lord Illingworth a bad man.  That is why I don’t want my boy to be with him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  My dear mother, it all sounds very tragic, of course.  But I dare say the girl was just as much to blame as Lord Illingworth was.—After all, would a really nice girl, a girl with any nice feelings at all, go away from her home with a man to whom she was not married, and live with him as his wife?  No nice girl would.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>After a pause</i>.]  Gerald, I withdraw all my objections.  You are at liberty to go away with Lord Illingworth, when and where you choose.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Dear mother, I knew you wouldn’t stand in my way.  You are the best woman God ever made.  And, as for Lord Illingworth, I don’t believe he is capable of anything infamous or base.  I can’t believe it of him—I can’t.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Outside</i>.]  Let me go!  Let me go!  [<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>in terror</i>, <i>and rushes over to</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>and flings herself in his arms</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Oh! save me—save me from him!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  From whom?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  He has insulted me!  Horribly insulted me!  Save me!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Who?  Who has dared—?</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>enters at back of stage</i>.  <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>breaks from</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald’s</span> <i>arms and points to him</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>  [<i>He is quite beside himself with rage and indignation</i>.]  Lord Illingworth, you have insulted the purest thing on God’s earth, a thing as pure as my own mother.  You have insulted the woman I love most in the world with my own mother.  As there is a God in Heaven, I will kill you!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Rushing across and catching hold of him</i>]  No! no!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Thrusting her back</i>.]  Don’t hold me, mother.  Don’t hold me—I’ll kill him!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Let me go, I say!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Stop, Gerald, stop!  He is your own father!</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>clutches his mother’s hands and looks into her face</i>.  <i>She sinks slowly on the ground in shame</i>.  <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>steals towards the door</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>frowns and bites his lip</i>.  <i>After a time</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>raises his mother up</i>, <i>puts his arm round her</i>, <i>and leads her from the room</i>.]</p>
		<p style="text-align: center">
			<span class="smcap">Act Drop</span>
		</p>
		<h2>FOURTH ACT</h2>
		<p style="text-align: center">SCENE</p>
		<p><i>Sitting-room at Mrs. Arbuthnot’s</i>.  <i>Large open French window at back</i>, <i>looking on to garden</i>.  <i>Doors</i> R.C. <i>and</i> L.C.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Gerald Arbuthnot</span> <i>writing at table</i>.]</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span> R.C. <i>followed by</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>.  Lady Hunstanton and Mrs. Allonby.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> L.C.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Good morning, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  Good morning, Lady Hunstanton.  Good morning, Mrs. Allonby.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Sitting down</i>.]  We came to inquire for your dear mother, Gerald.  I hope she is better?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  My mother has not come down yet, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Ah, I am afraid the heat was too much for her last night.  I think there must have been thunder in the air.  Or perhaps it was the music.  Music makes one feel so romantic—at least it always gets on one’s nerves.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  It’s the same thing, nowadays.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  I am so glad I don’t know what you mean, dear.  I am afraid you mean something wrong.  Ah, I see you’re examining Mrs. Arbuthnot’s pretty room.  Isn’t it nice and old-fashioned?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  [<i>Surveying the room through her lorgnette</i>.]  It looks quite the happy English home.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  That’s just the word, dear; that just describes it.  One feels your mother’s good influence in everything she has about her, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Lord Illingworth says that all influence is bad, but that a good influence is the worst in the world.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  When Lord Illingworth knows Mrs. Arbuthnot better he will change his mind.  I must certainly bring him here.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I should like to see Lord Illingworth in a happy English home.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  It would do him a great deal of good, dear.  Most women in London, nowadays, seem to furnish their rooms with nothing but orchids, foreigners, and French novels.  But here we have the room of a sweet saint.  Fresh natural flowers, books that don’t shock one, pictures that one can look at without blushing.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  But I like blushing.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, there <i>is</i> a good deal to be said for blushing, if one can do it at the proper moment.  Poor dear Hunstanton used to tell me I didn’t blush nearly often enough.  But then he was so very particular.  He wouldn’t let me know any of his men friends, except those who were over seventy, like poor Lord Ashton: who afterwards, by the way, was brought into the Divorce Court.  A most unfortunate case.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I delight in men over seventy.  They always offer one the devotion of a lifetime.  I think seventy an ideal age for a man.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  She is quite incorrigible, Gerald, isn’t she?  By-the-by, Gerald, I hope your dear mother will come and see me more often now.  You and Lord Illingworth start almost immediately, don’t you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I have given up my intention of being Lord Illingworth’s secretary.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Surely not, Gerald!  It would be most unwise of you.  What reason can you have?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t think I should be suitable for the post.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I wish Lord Illingworth would ask me to be his secretary.  But he says I am not serious enough.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear, you really mustn’t talk like that in this house.  Mrs. Arbuthnot doesn’t know anything about the wicked society in which we all live.  She won’t go into it.  She is far too good.  I consider it was a great honour her coming to me last night.  It gave quite an atmosphere of respectability to the party.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Ah, that must have been what you thought was thunder in the air.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  My dear, how can you say that?  There is no resemblance between the two things at all.  But really, Gerald, what do you mean by not being suitable?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Lord Illingworth’s views of life and mine are too different.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  But, my dear Gerald, at your age you shouldn’t have any views of life.  They are quite out of place.  You must be guided by others in this matter.  Lord Illingworth has made you the most flattering offer, and travelling with him you would see the world—as much of it, at least, as one should look at—under the best auspices possible, and stay with all the right people, which is so important at this solemn moment in your career.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t want to see the world: I’ve seen enough of it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  I hope you don’t think you have exhausted life, Mr. Arbuthnot.  When a man says that, one knows that life has exhausted him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t wish to leave my mother.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Now, Gerald, that is pure laziness on your part.  Not leave your mother!  If I were your mother I would insist on your going.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span> L.C.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>.  Mrs. Arbuthnot’s compliments, my lady, but she has a bad headache, and cannot see any one this morning.  [<i>Exit</i> R.C.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  A bad headache!  I am so sorry!  Perhaps you’ll bring her up to Hunstanton this afternoon, if she is better, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I am afraid not this afternoon, Lady Hunstanton.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  Well, to-morrow, then.  Ah, if you had a father, Gerald, he wouldn’t let you waste your life here.  He would send you off with Lord Illingworth at once.  But mothers are so weak.  They give up to their sons in everything.  We are all heart, all heart.  Come, dear, I must call at the rectory and inquire for Mrs. Daubeny, who, I am afraid, is far from well.  It is wonderful how the Archdeacon bears up, quite wonderful.  He is the most sympathetic of husbands.  Quite a model.  Good-bye, Gerald, give my fondest love to your mother.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  Good-bye, Mr. Arbuthnot.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Good-bye.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>sits down and reads over his letter</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  What name can I sign?  I, who have no right to any name.  [<i>Signs name</i>, <i>puts letter into envelope</i>, <i>addresses it</i>, <i>and is about to seal it</i>, <i>when door</i> L.C. <i>opens and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>enters</i>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>lays down sealing-wax</i>.  <i>Mother and son look at each other</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lady Hunstanton</span>.  [<i>Through French window at the back</i>.]  Good-bye again, Gerald.  We are taking the short cut across your pretty garden.  Now, remember my advice to you—start at once with Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Allonby</span>.  <i>Au revoir</i>, Mr. Arbuthnot.  Mind you bring me back something nice from your travels—not an Indian shawl—on no account an Indian shawl.</p>
		<p>[<i>Exeunt</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I have just written to him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  To whom?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  To my father.  I have written to tell him to come here at four o’clock this afternoon.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He shall not come here.  He shall not cross the threshold of my house.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  He must come.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Gerald, if you are going away with Lord Illingworth, go at once.  Go before it kills me: but don’t ask me to meet him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you don’t understand.  Nothing in the world would induce me to go away with Lord Illingworth, or to leave you.  Surely you know me well enough for that.  No: I have written to him to say—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What can you have to say to him?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Can’t you guess, mother, what I have written in this letter?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, surely you can.  Think, think what must be done, now, at once, within the next few days.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  There is nothing to be done.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I have written to Lord Illingworth to tell him that he must marry you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Marry me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I will force him to do it.  The wrong that has been done you must be repaired.  Atonement must be made.  Justice may be slow, mother, but it comes in the end.  In a few days you shall be Lord Illingworth’s lawful wife.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But, Gerald—</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I will insist upon his doing it.  I will make him do it: he will not dare to refuse.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But, Gerald, it is I who refuse.  I will not marry Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Not marry him?  Mother!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not marry him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But you don’t understand: it is for your sake I am talking, not for mine.  This marriage, this necessary marriage, this marriage which for obvious reasons must inevitably take place, will not help me, will not give me a name that will be really, rightly mine to bear.  But surely it will be something for you, that you, my mother, should, however late, become the wife of the man who is my father.  Will not that be something?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not marry him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you must.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I will not.  You talk of atonement for a wrong done.  What atonement can be made to me?  There is no atonement possible.  I am disgraced: he is not.  That is all.  It is the usual history of a man and a woman as it usually happens, as it always happens.  And the ending is the ordinary ending.  The woman suffers.  The man goes free.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t know if that is the ordinary ending, mother: I hope it is not.  But your life, at any rate, shall not end like that.  The man shall make whatever reparation is possible.  It is not enough.  It does not wipe out the past, I know that.  But at least it makes the future better, better for you, mother.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I refuse to marry Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  If he came to you himself and asked you to be his wife you would give him a different answer.  Remember, he is my father.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  If he came himself, which he will not do, my answer would be the same.  Remember I am your mother.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you make it terribly difficult for me by talking like that; and I can’t understand why you won’t look at this matter from the right, from the only proper standpoint.  It is to take away the bitterness out of your life, to take away the shadow that lies on your name, that this marriage must take place.  There is no alternative: and after the marriage you and I can go away together.  But the marriage must take place first.  It is a duty that you owe, not merely to yourself, but to all other women—yes: to all the other women in the world, lest he betray more.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I owe nothing to other women.  There is not one of them to help me.  There is not one woman in the world to whom I could go for pity, if I would take it, or for sympathy, if I could win it.  Women are hard on each other.  That girl, last night, good though she is, fled from the room as though I were a tainted thing.  She was right.  I am a tainted thing.  But my wrongs are my own, and I will bear them alone.  I must bear them alone.  What have women who have not sinned to do with me, or I with them?  We do not understand each other.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>behind</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I implore you to do what I ask you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What son has ever asked of his mother to make so hideous a sacrifice?  None.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  What mother has ever refused to marry the father of her own child?  None.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Let me be the first, then.  I will not do it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you believe in religion, and you brought me up to believe in it also.  Well, surely your religion, the religion that you taught me when I was a boy, mother, must tell you that I am right.  You know it, you feel it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I do not know it.  I do not feel it, nor will I ever stand before God’s altar and ask God’s blessing on so hideous a mockery as a marriage between me and George Harford.  I will not say the words the Church bids us to say.  I will not say them.  I dare not.  How could I swear to love the man I loathe, to honour him who wrought you dishonour, to obey him who, in his mastery, made me to sin?  No: marriage is a sacrament for those who love each other.  It is not for such as him, or such as me.  Gerald, to save you from the world’s sneers and taunts I have lied to the world.  For twenty years I have lied to the world.  I could not tell the world the truth.  Who can, ever?  But not for my own sake will I lie to God, and in God’s presence.  No, Gerald, no ceremony, Church-hallowed or State-made, shall ever bind me to George Harford.  It may be that I am too bound to him already, who, robbing me, yet left me richer, so that in the mire of my life I found the pearl of price, or what I thought would be so.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  I don’t understand you now.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Men don’t understand what mothers are.  I am no different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong I did, and my very heavy punishments and great disgrace.  And yet, to bear you I had to look on death.  To nurture you I had to wrestle with it.  Death fought with me for you.  All women have to fight with death to keep their children.  Death, being childless, wants our children from us.  Gerald, when you were naked I clothed you, when you were hungry I gave you food.  Night and day all that long winter I tended you.  No office is too mean, no care too lowly for the thing we women love—and oh! how <i>I</i> loved <i>you</i>.  Not Hannah, Samuel more.  And you needed love, for you were weakly, and only love could have kept you alive.  Only love can keep any one alive.  And boys are careless often and without thinking give pain, and we always fancy that when they come to man’s estate and know us better they will repay us.  But it is not so.  The world draws them from our side, and they make friends with whom they are happier than they are with us, and have amusements from which we are barred, and interests that are not ours: and they are unjust to us often, for when they find life bitter they blame us for it, and when they find it sweet we do not taste its sweetness with them . . . You made many friends and went into their houses and were glad with them, and I, knowing my secret, did not dare to follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun and sat in darkness.  What should I have done in honest households?  My past was ever with me. . . . And you thought I didn’t care for the pleasant things of life.  I tell you I longed for them, but did not dare to touch them, feeling I had no right.  You thought I was happier working amongst the poor.  That was my mission, you imagined.  It was not, but where else was I to go?  The sick do not ask if the hand that smooths their pillow is pure, nor the dying care if the lips that touch their brow have known the kiss of sin.  It was you I thought of all the time; I gave to them the love you did not need: lavished on them a love that was not theirs . . . And you thought I spent too much of my time in going to Church, and in Church duties.  But where else could I turn?  God’s house is the only house where sinners are made welcome, and you were always in my heart, Gerald, too much in my heart.  For, though day after day, at morn or evensong, I have knelt in God’s house, I have never repented of my sin.  How could I repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit!  Even now that you are bitter to me I cannot repent.  I do not.  You are more to me than innocence.  I would rather be your mother—oh! much rather!—than have been always pure . . . Oh, don’t you see? don’t you understand?  It is my dishonour that has made you so dear to me.  It is my disgrace that has bound you so closely to me.  It is the price I paid for you—the price of soul and body—that makes me love you as I do.  Oh, don’t ask me to do this horrible thing.  Child of my shame, be still the child of my shame!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I didn’t know you loved me so much as that.  And I will be a better son to you than I have been.  And you and I must never leave each other . . . but, mother . . . I can’t help it . . . you must become my father’s wife.  You must marry him.  It is your duty.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Running forwards and embracing</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  No, no; you shall not.  That would be real dishonour, the first you have ever known.  That would be real disgrace: the first to touch you.  Leave him and come with me.  There are other countries than England . . . Oh! other countries over sea, better, wiser, and less unjust lands.  The world is very wide and very big.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No, not for me.  For me the world is shrivelled to a palm’s breadth, and where I walk there are thorns.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  It shall not be so.  We shall somewhere find green valleys and fresh waters, and if we weep, well, we shall weep together.  Have we not both loved him?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Hester!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Waving him back</i>.]  Don’t, don’t!  You cannot love me at all, unless you love her also.  You cannot honour me, unless she’s holier to you.  In her all womanhood is martyred.  Not she alone, but all of us are stricken in her house.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Hester, Hester, what shall I do?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Do you respect the man who is your father?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Respect him?  I despise him!  He is infamous.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I thank you for saving me from him last night.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Ah, that is nothing.  I would die to save you.  But you don’t tell me what to do now!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Have I not thanked you for saving <i>me</i>?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  But what should I do?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Ask your own heart, not mine.  I never had a mother to save, or shame.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He is hard—he is hard.  Let me go away.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  [<i>Rushes over and kneels down bedside his mother</i>.]  Mother, forgive me: I have been to blame.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Don’t kiss my hands: they are cold.  My heart is cold: something has broken it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Ah, don’t say that.  Hearts live by being wounded.  Pleasure may turn a heart to stone, riches may make it callous, but sorrow—oh, sorrow cannot break it.  Besides, what sorrows have you now?  Why, at this moment you are more dear to him than ever, <i>dear</i> though you have <i>been</i>, and oh! how dear you <i>have</i> been always.  Ah! be kind to him.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  You are my mother and my father all in one.  I need no second parent.  It was for you I spoke, for you alone.  Oh, say something, mother.  Have I but found one love to lose another?  Don’t tell me that.  O mother, you are cruel.  [<i>Gets up and flings himself sobbing on a sofa</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span>.]  But has he found indeed another love?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  You know I have loved him always.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But we are very poor.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Who, being loved, is poor?  Oh, no one.  I hate my riches.  They are a burden.  Let him share it with me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  But we are disgraced.  We rank among the outcasts. Gerald is nameless.  The sins of the parents should be visited on the children.  It is God’s law.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  I was wrong.  God’s law is only Love.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Rises</i>, <i>and taking</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>by the hand</i>, <i>goes slowly over to where</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>is lying on the sofa with his head buried in his hands</i>.  <i>She touches him and he looks up</i>.]  Gerald, I cannot give you a father, but I have brought you a wife.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, I am not worthy either of her or you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  So she comes first, you are worthy.  And when you are away, Gerald . . . with . . . her—oh, think of me sometimes.  Don’t forget me.  And when you pray, pray for me.  We should pray when we are happiest, and you will be happy, Gerald.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  Oh, you don’t think of leaving us?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother, you won’t leave us?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I might bring shame upon you!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Mother!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  For a little then: and if you let me, near you always.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.]  Come out with us to the garden.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Later on, later on.  [<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>goes towards door</i> L.C.   <i>Stops at looking-glass over mantelpiece and looks into it</i>.  <i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span> R.C.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Alice</span>.  A gentleman to see you, ma’am.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Say I am not at home.  Show me the card.  [<i>Takes card from salver and looks at it</i>.]  Say I will not see him.</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>enters</i>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>sees him in the glass and starts</i>, <i>but does not turn round</i>.  <i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Alice</span>.]  What can you have to say to me to-day, George Harford?  You can have nothing to say to me.  You must leave this house.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Rachel, Gerald knows everything about you and me now, so some arrangement must be come to that will suit us all three.  I assure you, he will find in me the most charming and generous of fathers.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  My son may come in at any moment.  I saved you last night.  I may not be able to save you again.  My son feels my dishonour strongly, terribly strongly.  I beg you to go.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Sitting down</i>.]  Last night was excessively unfortunate.  That silly Puritan girl making a scene merely because I wanted to kiss her.  What harm is there in a kiss?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Turning round</i>.]  A kiss may ruin a human life, George Harford.  <i>I</i> know that.  <i>I</i> know that too well.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  We won’t discuss that at present.  What is of importance to-day, as yesterday, is still our son.  I am extremely fond of him, as you know, and odd though it may seem to you, I admired his conduct last night immensely.  He took up the cudgels for that pretty prude with wonderful promptitude.  He is just what I should have liked a son of mine to be.  Except that no son of mine should ever take the side of the Puritans: that is always an error.  Now, what I propose is this.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Lord Illingworth, no proposition of yours interests me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  According to our ridiculous English laws, I can’t legitimise Gerald.  But I can leave him my property.  Illingworth is entailed, of course, but it is a tedious barrack of a place.  He can have Ashby, which is much prettier, Harborough, which has the best shooting in the north of England, and the house in St. James Square.  What more can a gentleman require in this world?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Nothing more, I am quite sure.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  As for a title, a title is really rather a nuisance in these democratic days.  As George Harford I had everything I wanted.  Now I have merely everything that other people want, which isn’t nearly so pleasant.  Well, my proposal is this.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I told you I was not interested, and I beg you to go.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  The boy is to be with you for six months in the year, and with me for the other six.  That is perfectly fair, is it not?  You can have whatever allowance you like, and live where you choose.  As for your past, no one knows anything about it except myself and Gerald.  There is the Puritan, of course, the Puritan in white muslin, but she doesn’t count.  She couldn’t tell the story without explaining that she objected to being kissed, could she?  And all the women would think her a fool and the men think her a bore.  And you need not be afraid that Gerald won’t be my heir.  I needn’t tell you I have not the slightest intention of marrying.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You come too late.  My son has no need of you.  You are not necessary.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What do you mean, Rachel?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  That you are not necessary to Gerald’s career.  He does not require you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I do not understand you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Look into the garden.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>rises and goes towards window</i>.]  You had better not let them see you: you bring unpleasant memories.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>looks out and starts</i>.]  She loves him.  They love each other.  We are safe from you, and we are going away.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Where?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  We will not tell you, and if you find us we will not know you.  You seem surprised.  What welcome would you get from the girl whose lips you tried to soil, from the boy whose life you have shamed, from the mother whose dishonour comes from you?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You have grown hard, Rachel.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I was too weak once.  It is well for me that I have changed.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I was very young at the time.  We men know life too early.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  And we women know life too late.  That is the difference between men and women.  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Rachel, I want my son.  My money may be of no use to him now.  I may be of no use to him, but I want my son.  Bring us together, Rachel.  You can do it if you choose.  [<i>Sees letter on table</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  There is no room in my boy’s life for you.  He is not interested in <i>you</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Then why does he write to me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  What do you mean?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What letter is this?  [<i>Takes up letter</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  That—is nothing.  Give it to me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is addressed to <i>me</i>.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You are not to open it.  I forbid you to open it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And in Gerald’s handwriting.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It was not to have been sent.  It is a letter he wrote to you this morning, before he saw me.  But he is sorry now he wrote it, very sorry.  You are not to open it.  Give it to me.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It belongs to me.  [<i>Opens it</i>, <i>sits down and reads it slowly</i>. <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>watches him all the time</i>.]  You have read this letter, I suppose, Rachel?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  You know what is in it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I don’t admit for a moment that the boy is right in what he says.  I don’t admit that it is any duty of mine to marry you.  I deny it entirely.  But to get my son back I am ready—yes, I am ready to marry you, Rachel—and to treat you always with the deference and respect due to my wife.  I will marry you as soon as you choose.  I give you my word of honour.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You made that promise to me once before and broke it.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I will keep it now.  And that will show you that I love my son, at least as much as you love him.  For when I marry you, Rachel, there are some ambitions I shall have to surrender.  High ambitions, too, if any ambition is high.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I decline to marry you, Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Are you serious?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Do tell me your reasons.  They would interest me enormously.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  I have already explained them to my son.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I suppose they were intensely sentimental, weren’t they?  You women live by your emotions and for them.  You have no philosophy of life.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  You are right.  We women live by our emotions and for them.  By our passions, and for them, if you will.  I have two passions, Lord Illingworth: my love of him, my hate of you.  You cannot kill those.  They feed each other.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What sort of love is that which needs to have hate as its brother?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It is the sort of love I have for Gerald.  Do you think that terrible?  Well it is terrible.  All love is terrible.  All love is a tragedy.  I loved you once, Lord Illingworth.  Oh, what a tragedy for a woman to have loved you!</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  So you really refuse to marry me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  Because you hate me?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Yes.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  And does my son hate me as you do?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  No.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  I am glad of that, Rachel.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  He merely despises you.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What a pity!  What a pity for him, I mean.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Don’t be deceived, George.  Children begin by loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely if ever do they forgive them.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Reads letter over again</i>, <i>very slowly</i>.]  May I ask by what arguments you made the boy who wrote this letter, this beautiful, passionate letter, believe that you should not marry his father, the father of your own child?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  It was not I who made him see it.  It was another.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  What <i>fin-de-siècle</i> person?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  The Puritan, Lord Illingworth.  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  [<i>Winces</i>, <i>then rises slowly and goes over to table where his hat and gloves are</i>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>is standing close to the table</i>.  <i>He picks up one of the gloves, and begins pulling it on</i>.]  There is not much then for me to do here, Rachel?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  Nothing.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  It is good-bye, is it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  For ever, I hope, this time, Lord Illingworth.</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span>.  How curious!  At this moment you look exactly as you looked the night you left me twenty years ago.  You have just the same expression in your mouth.  Upon my word, Rachel, no woman ever loved me as you did.  Why, you gave yourself to me like a flower, to do anything I liked with.  You were the prettiest of playthings, the most fascinating of small romances . . . [<i>Pulls out watch</i>.]  Quarter to two!  Must be strolling back to Hunstanton.  Don’t suppose I shall see you there again.  I’m sorry, I am, really.  It’s been an amusing experience to have met amongst people of one’s own rank, and treated quite seriously too, one’s mistress, and one’s—</p>
		<p>[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span> <i>snatches up glove and strikes</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>across the face with it</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth</span> <i>starts</i>.  <i>He is dazed by the insult of his punishment</i>.  <i>Then he controls himself</i>, <i>and goes to window and looks out at his son</i>.  <i>Sighs and leaves the room</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Falls sobbing on the sofa</i>.]  He would have said it.  He would have said it.</p>
		<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hester</span> <i>from the garden</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Well, dear mother.  You never came out after all.  So we have come in to fetch you.  Mother, you have not been crying?  [<i>Kneels down beside her</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  My boy!  My boy!  My boy!  [<i>Running her fingers through his hair</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  [<i>Coming over</i>.]  But you have two children now.  You’ll let me be your daughter?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Looking up</i>.]  Would you choose me for a mother?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Hester</span>.  You of all women I have ever known.</p>
		<p>[<i>They move towards the door leading into garden with their arms round each other’s waists</i>.  <span class="smcap">Gerald</span> <i>goes to table</i> L.C. <i>for his hat</i>.  <i>On turning round he sees</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Illingworth’s</span> <i>glove lying on the floor</i>, <i>and picks it up</i>.]</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Gerald</span>.  Hallo, mother, whose glove is this?  You have had a visitor.  Who was it?</p>
		<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Arbuthnot</span>.  [<i>Turning round</i>.]  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A man of no importance.</p>
		<p style="text-align: center">
			<span class="smcap">Curtain</span>
		</p>
	</body>
</html>
